<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

> Doc 1: <a href="https://react-redux.js.org/">react-redux.org</a> & Doc 2: <a href="https://redux.js.org/tutorials/fundamentals/part-5-ui-react">UI and Redux</a>

Redux is a standalone JS library. As we've already seen, you can create and use a Redux store even if you don't have a user interface set up. This also means that you can use Redux with any UI framework (or even without any UI framework), and use it on both client and server. You can write Redux apps with React, Vue, Angular, Ember, jQuery, or vanilla JavaScript. That said, Redux was specifically designed to work well with React. React lets you describe your UI as a function of your state, and Redux contains state and updates it in response to actions.<br>

Using Redux with any UI layer requires a few consistent steps:
1. Create a Redux store
2. Subscribe to updates
3. Inside the subscription callback:
    - Get the current store state
    - Extract the data needed by this piece of UI
    - Update the UI with the data
4. If necessary, render the UI with initial state
5. Respond to UI inputs by dispatching Redux actions

The official React-Redux UI bindings library <b style="color:salmon">react-redux</b> is a separate package from the Redux core. You'll need to install that in addition.

<br>

# Reading State from the Store in UI

Like many other libraries, `react-redux` includes its own custom hooks, which you can use in your own components. They give your React component the ability to talk to the Redux store by reading state and dispatching actions. The first such hook that we'll look at is the <span style="color: Orange;">useSelector</span> hook, which lets your React components read data from the Redux store.

This hook accepts a single function, which we call a selector function. A selector is a function that takes the entire Redux store state as its argument(the one which we get via `store.getState()`), reads some value from the state, and returns that result. And whatever the selector returns will be returned by the hook to your component. For example:

```js
const todos = useSelector(state => state.todos)
```

Selectors can return values from the Redux store state, and also return derived values based on that state as well. `useSelector` automatically subscribes to the Redux store for us! That way, any time an action is dispatched, it will call its selector function again right away. If the value returned by the selector changes from the last time it ran, `useSelector` will force our component to re-render with the new data. All we have to do is call `useSelector` once in our component, and it does the rest of the work for us.

<span style="color: HotPink;">We can also extract multiple fields of state in one hook call only by making the selector function return an object of them and destructure them later!</span>

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(234, 34, 20, 0.58);">

`useSelector` compares its results using `strict === reference` comparisons, so the component will re-render any time the selector result is a new reference! This means that if you create a new reference in your selector and return it, your component could re-render every time an action has been dispatched, even if the data really isn't different. For example, passing below selector to `useSelector` will cause the component to always re-render, because `array.map()` always returns a new array reference:

```js
// Bad: always returning a new reference
const selectTodoDescriptions = state => {
  // This creates a new array reference!
  return state.todos.map(todo => todo.text)
}
```

Hence, <b style="color: SpringGreen;">createSelector</b> can be helpful here!

</div>

<br>

# Dispatching actions from UI

We now know how to read data from the Redux store into our components. But, how can we dispatch actions to the store from a component? We know that outside of React, we can call `store.dispatch(action)`. Since we don't have access to the store in a component file, we need some way to get access to the `dispatch` function by itself inside our components.

The `react-redux` <span style="color: Orange;">useDispatch</span> hook gives us the store's `dispatch` method as its result (In fact, the implementation of the hook really is `return store.dispatch`). So, we can call `const dispatch = useDispatch()` in any component that needs to dispatch actions, and then call `dispatch(someAction)` as needed.

<br>

# Passing the Store with Provider

Our components can now read state from the store, and dispatch actions to the store. However, we're still missing something. Where and how are the `react-redux` hooks finding the right Redux store? A hook is a JS function, so it can't automatically import a store from store.js by itself.

Instead, we have to specifically tell `react-redux` what store we want to use in our components. We do this by rendering a **`<Provider>`** component around our entire `<App>`, and passing the Redux store as a prop to `<Provider>`. After we do this once, every component in the application will be able to access the Redux store if it needs to.


```js
import React from 'react'
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom'
import { Provider } from 'react-redux'

import App from './App'
import store from './store'

ReactDOM.render(
  <React.StrictMode>
    <Provider store={store}>
      <App />
    </Provider>
  </React.StrictMode>,
  document.getElementById('root')
)
```

<br>

# connect API 

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgb(5, 72, 5);">

`connect` still works and is supported in `React-Redux 8.x`. However, it is recommended to use the hooks API as the default.
</div>

<br>

`react-redux` library provides a connect function for you to read values from the Redux store (and re-read the values when the store updates). The connect function takes two arguments, both optional:

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">mapStateToProps</h3>

As the first argument passed in to connect, <span style="color: Gold;">mapStateToProps</span> is used for selecting the part of the data from the store that the connected component needs. Note:

- It is called every time the store state changes.
- It receives the entire store state, and should return an object of data this component needs.

`mapStateToProps` should always be defined as function. It takes 2 arguments:

1. <span style="color: HotPink;">state</span>: The first argument to a `mapStateToProps` function is the entire Redux store state (the same value returned by a call to `store.getState()`). Because of this, the first argument is traditionally just called `state`.
2.  <span style="color: HotPink;">ownProps (`optional`)</span>: You may define the function with a second argument, `ownProps`, if your component needs the data from its own props to retrieve data from the store.

```js
function mapStateToProps(state, ownProps?)
```

Your `mapStateToProps` function should return a plain object that contains the data the component needs:
- Each field in the object will become a prop for your actual component.
- The values in the fields will be used to determine if your component needs to re-render.<br>

You do not need to include values from `ownProps` in the object returned from `mapStateToProps`. `connect` will automatically merge those different prop sources into a final set of props. Syntax:-

Example:- 
```js
function mapStateToProps(state) {
  return {
    a: 42,
    todos: state.todos,
    filter: state.visibilityFilter,
  }
}
```

<b style="color:red;">⚠️ NOTE ⚠️:</b> React Redux does shallow comparisons to see if the `mapStateToProps` results have changed. It’s easy to accidentally return new object or array references every time, which would cause your component to re-render even if the data is actually the same. Put these operations in memoized selector functions to ensure that they only run if the input values have changed. 

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">mapDispatchToProps</h3>

As the second argument passed in to `connect`, <span style="color: Gold;">mapDispatchToProps</span> is used for dispatching actions to the store. `dispatch` is a function of the Redux store. You call `store.dispatch` to dispatch an action. This is the only way to trigger a state change. With React Redux, your components never access the store directly - `connect` does it for you. React Redux gives you two ways to let components dispatch actions:

- `connect` can accept an argument called `mapDispatchToProps`, which lets you create functions that dispatch when called, and pass those functions as props to your component.
- By default, even if we don't specify or pass `mapDispatchToProps` as null, a connected component receives prop `dispatch` and can dispatch actions itself. Example, in all below cases, we receive dispatch prop: 
```js
connect()(MyComponent)
// which is equivalent with
connect(null, null)(MyComponent)
// or
connect(mapStateToProps /** no second argument */)(MyComponent)
```

Providing a `mapDispatchToProps` allows you to specify which actions your component might need to dispatch. It lets you provide action dispatching functions as props. Therefore, instead of calling `props.dispatch(() => increment())`, you may call props.`increment()` directly.

```jsx
// button needs to be aware of "dispatch"
<button onClick={() => dispatch({ type: "SOMETHING" })} />

// button unaware of "dispatch",
<button onClick={doSomething} />
```

Once you've wrapped all our action creators with functions that dispatch the actions, the component is free of the need of `dispatch`. Therefore, <span style="color:cyan">if you define your own mapDispatchToProps, the connected component will no longer receive dispatch.</span><br>

The `mapDispatchToProps` parameter can be of two forms :

<b style="color: Violet">1. Function form</b>: Defining `mapDispatchToProps` as a function gives you the most flexibility in customizing the functions your component receives, and how they dispatch actions. You gain access to `dispatch` and `ownProps`. You may use this chance to write customized functions to be called by your connected components. Your `mapDispatchToProps` function should return a plain object:
  - Each field in the object will become a separate prop for your own component, and the value should normally be a function that dispatches an action when called.
  - If you use action creators ( as oppose to plain object actions ) inside `dispatch`, it is a convention to simply name the field key the same name as the action creator.
```js
const increment = () => ({ type: 'INCREMENT' })
const decrement = () => ({ type: 'DECREMENT' })
const reset = () => ({ type: 'RESET' })

const mapDispatchToProps = (dispatch, ownProps /* (optional argument) */) => {
  return {
    // dispatching actions returned by action creators
    increment: () => dispatch(increment()),
    decrement: () => dispatch(decrement()),
    reset: () => dispatch(reset()),
  }
}
```
The return of the `mapDispatchToProps` function will be merged to your connected component as props. You may call them directly to dispatch its action.
```js
function Counter({ count, increment, decrement, reset }) {
  return (
    <div>
      <button onClick={decrement}>-</button>
      <span>{count}</span>
      <button onClick={increment}>+</button>
      <button onClick={reset}>reset</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```
Wrapping these functions by hand is tedious, so Redux provides a function to simplify that. `bindActionCreators` turns an object whose values are action creators, into an object with the same keys, but with every action creator wrapped into a `dispatch` call so they may be invoked directly. `bindActionCreators` accepts two parameters:
1. A function (an action creator) or an object (each field an action creator)
2. dispatch

```js
import { bindActionCreators } from 'redux'

const increment = () => ({ type: 'INCREMENT' })
const decrement = () => ({ type: 'DECREMENT' })
const reset = () => ({ type: 'RESET' })

function mapDispatchToProps(dispatch) {
  return bindActionCreators({ increment, decrement, reset }, dispatch);
  // returns
  // {
  //   increment: (...args) => dispatch(increment(...args)),
  //   decrement: (...args) => dispatch(decrement(...args)),
  //   reset: (...args) => dispatch(reset(...args)),
  // }
}

// component receives props.increment, props.decrement, props.reset
connect(null, mapDispatchToProps)(Counter)
```

<b style="color: Violet">2. Object shorthand form</b>: More declarative and easier to use. `connect` supports an “object shorthand” form for the `mapDispatchToProps` argument --- if you pass an object full of action creators instead of a function, connect will automatically call `bindActionCreators` for you internally.
Note that:
 - Each field of the `mapDispatchToProps` object is assumed to be an action creator
 - Your component will no longer receive `dispatch` as a prop

 ```js
 const mapDispatchToProps = {
  increment,
  decrement,
  reset,
}
// above keys are action creators defined in above code block
 ```

<span style="color: SpringGreen">Obviously these action creators can also return functions instead of objects if thunk middleware is used.</span>

⭐ Note: It is recommended to use the object form of `mapDispatchToProps` unless you specifically need to customize dispatching behavior in some way.

</div>