<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

Redux Toolkit (also known as "RTK" for short) is official recommended approach for writing Redux logic. The <span style="color: Yellow;">@reduxjs/toolkit</span> package wraps around the core `redux` package, and contains API methods and common dependencies that we think are essential for building a Redux app. Redux Toolkit builds in our suggested best practices, simplifies most Redux tasks, prevents common mistakes, and makes it easier to write Redux applications.

RTK includes utilities that help simplify many common use cases, including store setup, creating reducers and writing immutable update logic, and even creating entire "slices" of state at once.

Redux Toolkit is designed to solve following problems problems:

- Writing Redux Core involves a lot of repetitive and verbose code like creating action creators (type constants and functions), reducers with switch-case logic, manually combining reducers, etc. Redux Toolkit eliminates the need to write any action creators or action types by hand, it automatically generates them.
- Redux Core requires manual immutability management and updating deeply nested state requires creating copies at every level. RTK integrates `Immer`, allowing you to write "mutative" code that produces immutable updates behind the scenes.
- Redux Toolkit offers excellent TS support, with APIs that are designed to give you excellent type safety and minimize the number of types you have to define in your code.
- RTK Query can eliminate the need to write any thunks, reducers, action creators, or effect hooks to manage fetching data and tracking loading state.

Installation:

```bash
npm install @reduxjs/toolkit
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">1. Store Setup</h3>

Redux Toolkit has a <span style="color: Violet;">configureStore</span> API that simplifies the store setup process. `configureStore` wraps around the Redux core `createStore` API, and handles most of the store setup for us automatically. In fact, we can cut it down to effectively one step:

```js
import { configureStore } from '@reduxjs/toolkit';

import todosReducer from './features/todos/todosSlice';
import filtersReducer from './features/filters/filtersSlice';

const store = configureStore({
  reducer: {
    // Define a top-level state field named `todos`, handled by `todosReducer`
    todos: todosReducer,
    filters: filtersReducer,
  },
});

export default store;
```

That one call to `configureStore` did all the work for us:

- It combined `todosReducer` and `filtersReducer` into the root reducer function, which will handle a root state that looks like `{todos, filters}`.
- It created a Redux store using that root reducer.
- It automatically added the `thunk` middleware.
- It automatically added more middleware to check for common mistakes like accidentally mutating the state.
- It automatically set up the Redux DevTools Extension connection.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">2. Write Slices</h3>

Redux Toolkit has a <span style="color: Yellow;">createSlice</span> API that will help us simplify our Redux reducer logic and actions. `createSlice` does several important things for us:

- We can write the case reducers as functions inside of an object, instead of having to write a `switch/case` statement.
- The reducers will be able to write shorter immutable update logic.
- All the action creators will be generated automatically based on the reducer functions we've provided.

`createSlice` takes an object with three main options fields:

- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">name</span>: A string that will be used as the prefix for generated action types. This helps in identifying actions generated by the slice.
- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">initialState</span>: The initial state of the reducer. This can be any JavaScript data type (e.g., object, array, or primitive).
- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">reducers</span>: An object where keys are action names and values are reducer functions. These methods automatically generate corresponding action creators.
- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">extraReducers</span>: Used to handle actions that are external to the slice—actions not defined in the `reducers` field of the slice. It allows a slice to respond to actions created elsewhere, such as:

  - Actions created by other slices.
  - Actions created using `createAsyncThunk`.
  - Custom actions created using `createAction`.
    This field is defined as either:
  - An Object: Maps actions to reducer functions directly.
  - A Callback Function: Uses a `builder` pattern (`builder.addCase`) for more flexibility, especially with TypeScript.

<u>**EXAMPLE OF `createSlice`**</u>

  ```js
    // Object notation
  extraReducers: {
      [someAction.type]: (state, action) => { /* reducer logic */ },
  }

  // Builder callback function
  extraReducers: (builder) => {
      builder
          .addCase(someAction, (state, action) => { /* reducer logic */ })
          .addCase(anotherAction, (state, action) => { /* reducer logic */ });
  }
  ```

```js
import { createSlice } from '@reduxjs/toolkit';

const counterSlice = createSlice({
  name: 'counter',
  initialState: {
    value: 0,
  },
  reducers: {
    increment: (state) => {
      state.value += 1;
    },
    decrement: (state) => {
      state.value -= 1;
    },
    incrementByAmount: (state, action) => {
      state.value += action.payload;
    },
  },
});

export const { increment, decrement, incrementByAmount } = counterSlice.actions;
export default counterSlice.reducer;
```

<b><u>Observations from above code:</u></b>

- <span style="color: Cyan;">`createSlice` allows us to safely "mutate" our state!</span> This is because it uses the library `Immer` inside.
- `createSlice` automatically returns the existing state in the default case.
- In this example, `counterSlice` creates a reducer under <span style="color: Gold;">reducer</span> property which can be combined with other reducers in your store and action creators under <span style="color: HotPink;">actions</span> property (`increment`, `decrement`, `incrementByAmount`). We typically destructure and export action creators and default export the reducer.
- These auto-generated action objects look like below. Action type string is generated by combining slice's `name` field with the name of the reducer function we wrote.

  ```js
  console.log(incrementByAmount(10));
  // { type: 'counter/incrementByAmount', payload: 10 }
  ```

- Inside of the generated reducer function, `createSlice` will check to see if a dispatched action's `action.type` matches one of the names it generated. If so, it will run that case reducer function.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">3. Writing Thunks</h3>

Redux Toolkit has a <span style="color: Gold;">createAsyncThunk</span> API that will generate these thunks for us. It also generates the action types and action creators for those different request status actions, and dispatches those actions automatically based on the resulting Promise.

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background: rgba(85, 234, 117, 0.2);">
Redux Toolkit has a new <a href="https://redux-toolkit.js.org/rtk-query/overview">RTK Query data fetching API</a>. RTK Query is a purpose built data fetching and caching solution for Redux apps, and can eliminate the need to write any thunks or reducers to manage data fetching.
</div>

<br>

<b><u>Key Features:</u></b>

- Manages Action Lifecycle: Automatically generates `pending`, `fulfilled`, and `rejected` action types. 
- Simplifies managing the different states of an asynchronous operation (e.g., `loading`, `success`, `error`).
- Reduces Boilerplate: Eliminates the need to manually define action types, action creators, and reducers for async logic.
- Handles Errors: Automatically catches errors and dispatches a rejected action.

`createAsyncThunk` accepts two arguments:

1. A string that will be used as the prefix for the generated action types
2. A "payload creator" callback function that should return a Promise. This is often written using the async/await syntax, since async functions automatically return a promise.

```js
import { createSlice, createAsyncThunk } from '@reduxjs/toolkit'

// omit imports and state

export const fetchTodos = createAsyncThunk('todos/fetchTodos', async () => {
  const response = await client.get('/fakeApi/todos')
  return response.todos
})

const todosSlice = createSlice({
  name: 'todos',
  initialState,
  reducers: {
    // omit reducer cases
  },
  extraReducers: builder => {
    builder
      .addCase(fetchTodos.pending, (state, action) => {
        state.status = 'loading'
      })
      .addCase(fetchTodos.fulfilled, (state, action) => {
        const newEntities = {}
        action.payload.forEach(todo => {
          newEntities[todo.id] = todo
        })
        state.entities = newEntities
        state.status = 'idle'
      })
  }
})

// omit exports
```



</div>
