<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# LOADERS

Webpack only understands JavaScript and JSON files. Loaders allow webpack to process other types of files and convert them into valid modules that can be consumed by your application and added to the dependency graph. They can transform files from a different language (like TypeScript) to JavaScript or load inline images as data URLs. They even allow you to do things like import CSS files directly from your JavaScript modules!

Loaders are configured in the <b style="color: Cyan;">module.rules</b> array. Each rule specifies 2 properties:

- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">test</span>: A regular expression used to determine which files should be transformed by the loader.
- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">use</span>: Specifies the loader(s) to apply. Can be a string (for a single loader), an object (specifying options for loader) or an array of strings/objects (for multiple loaders in a chain). Each loader in the chain applies transformations to the processed resource. <span style="color: Coral;">A chain is executed in reverse order (right to left).</span> The first loader passes its result (resource with applied transformations) to the next one, and so forth. <u>Finally, webpack expects JavaScript to be returned by the last loader in the chain.</u>

```js
// webpack.config.js
const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  output: {
    filename: 'my-first-webpack.bundle.js',
  },
  module: {
    rules: [{ test: /\.txt$/, use: 'raw-loader' }],
  },
};
```

In above code, whenever webpack compiler comes across a path that resolves to a `'.txt'` file inside of a `require()`/`import` statement, `raw-loader` is used to transform it before adding it to bundle. Installation of `raw-loader` package is required using `npm` or `yarn`.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Loading CSS and SASS</h3>

In order to import a CSS file from within a JavaScript module, you need to install and add the `style-loader` and `css-loader` to your module configuration:

```js
module.exports = {
  // ......,
  rules: [{ test: /\.css$/i, use: ['style-loader', 'css-loader'] }],
};
```

The above order of loaders should be maintained: `style-loader` comes first and followed by `css-loader`. If this convention is not followed, webpack is likely to throw errors. It effectively allows you to treat your CSS files as modules, enabling you to import them into your JavaScript code

1. <span style="color: Lime;">css-loader</span>: It interprets <span style="color: HotPink;">@import</span> and <span style="color: HotPink;">url()</span> directives in CSS files and resolves them into actual JS modules that can be imported & used in JS code and Webpack can process and bundle them.

   Using this method, css name conflicts can occur. To avoid this, we can enable the <span style="color: Crimson;">modules: true</span> option in `css-loader`. It transforms class names into unique, scoped names. And class names become part of a JavaScript object that you can import in your JavaScript files, allowing you to use CSS class names as JavaScript variables. <u>By convention, such css files should be named as `<name_of_your_choice>.module.css`</u>.

2. <span style="color: Lime;">style-loader</span>: It takes CSS code imported in your JavaScript files and injects it directly into the DOM as `<style>` tags, essentially allowing you to use CSS styles within your JavaScript code by dynamically adding them to the webpage's head section.

<b style="color:red;">DON'T KNOW WHY THE STYLES FROM CSS FILE ARE EXPORTED BY NAME AND NOT BY DEFAULT. FIND OUT! 🤔 </b>

```js
// webpack.config.js

module.exports = {
  // .......,
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.css$/i,
        use: [
          "style-loader",
          { loader: "css-loader", options: { modules: true } },
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
}
```

```js
// index.js

import * as styles from './index.module.css';

console.log(styles.button); // Output: '_button_abc123'

const button = document.createElement('button');
button.className = styles.button;
button.textContent = 'Click Me';
document.body.appendChild(button);
```



Now in order to be able to import sass files, just install and add <span style="color: Lime;">sass-loader</span> in the end. It will compile the sass to css.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;"><a href="https://webpack.js.org/loaders/babel-loader/">Babel loader</a></h3>

<b style="color:Magenta;">Babel</b> is a widely used tool for compiling modern JavaScript into a version that is compatible with older environments. It can convert ES6/ES7/ES8+ syntax into ES5 or lower. It uses plugins and presets to determine which transformations should be applied. <span style="color: Violet;">babel-loader</span> is a wrapper that enables Babel to work with webpack. It processes JavaScript files using Babel and integrates the transformed code into the webpack bundle.

Installation:

```
npm install -D babel-loader @babel/core @babel/preset-env @babel/preset-react @babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties --save-dev
```

Usage:

```js
module.exports = {
  //.....
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.(?:js|mjs|cjs)$/,
        exclude: /node_modules/,
        use: { loader: 'babel-loader', options: { presets: ['@babel/preset-env', { targets: 'defaults' }, '@babel/preset-react'] } },
        plugins: ['@babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties'],
      },
    ],
  },
};
```

**<u>Breakdown of above webpack configuration:</u>**

- `exclude: /node_modules/` tells webpack to ignore files in the `node_modules` directory. This is to avoid processing third-party libraries with Babel, which improves build performance since these libraries are typically already in a compatible JavaScript version.
- `presets` are collections of plugins that enable specific Babel transformations.
  - `@babel/preset-env` preset allows you to use the latest JavaScript features and compiles them down to a version that is compatible with the environments you target.
  - `{ targets: 'defaults' }` specifies the target environments for the code. The value 'defaults' is a shorthand for a set of target browsers that are widely used and have good support for modern JavaScript.
  - `@babel/preset-react` preset allows you to use JSX syntax and React-specific features.
- `@babel/plugin-proposal-class-properties` plugin allows us to use the class properties syntax in JavaScript code, enabling the use of properties directly within the class declaration.

<b style="color:red;">NOTE</b>: We can keep the presets and plugins in separate file usually called `.babelrc`.

**<------------------------------------THERE IS MORE TO BABLE THAN THIS------------------------------------>**

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Common Loaders and Their Use Cases:</h3>

- <span style="color: Orange;">babel-loader:</span> Transpiles modern JavaScript (ES6+) to ES5 using Babel.
- <span style="color: Orange;">css-loader:</span> Loads CSS files and resolves imports and dependencies.
- <span style="color: Orange;">style-loader:</span> Injects CSS into the DOM.
- <span style="color: Orange;">file-loader:</span> Emits files (e.g., images) to the output directory and returns the public URL.
- <span style="color: Orange;">url-loader:</span> Similar to file-loader, but can inline files as base64 URLs if they are below a certain size.
- <span style="color: Orange;">ts-loader:</span> Transpiles TypeScript files to JavaScript.
- <span style="color: Orange;">vue-loader:</span> Processes Vue single-file components.
- <span style="color: Orange;">html-loader:</span> Exports HTML as a string and handles image sources.
- <span style="color: Orange;">sass-loader:</span> Compiles Sass to CSS.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Inline Loaders</h3>

Loaders can also be applied inline within the import statements in the source code. This method is useful for overriding configuration on a per-file basis.

```js
import Styles from 'style-loader!css-loader!./styles.css';

// In this example, the CSS file styles.css is processed first by css-loader and then by style-loader.
```

<b style="color:Violet;">Tip:</b> Use `module.rules` whenever possible, as this will reduce boilerplate in your source code and allow you to debug or locate a loader faster if something goes south.

<br>

# ASSET MODULES

Asset modules in webpack are a set of features introduced in webpack 5 that simplify the handling of static assets such as images, fonts, and other files. They replace the need for specific loaders like `file-loader` and `url-loader`. Asset modules provide a straightforward way to manage how these assets are processed and included in your webpack bundles.

There are 4 types of asset modules:

- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">asset/resource</span>: Emits a separate file and exports the URL of that file. Previously achievable by using `file-loader`. It is suitable for handling larger files that should not be included directly in the JavaScript bundle. Typically used for images, fonts, or any other files that should be placed separately in the output directory.

  ```js
  import logo from './logo.png';
  console.log(logo); // outputs the URL of the logo.png
  ```

- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">asset/inline</span>: This type of module inlines the file content as a base64-encoded string (a text representation of binary data which could represent an image, audio file, or any other type of asset) directly into the JavaScript bundle. This is useful for small files where the overhead of a network request (for a separate file) would be greater than the file itself. Previously achievable by using `url-loader`. Ideal for small images or icons that should be included directly in the JavaScript bundle to reduce HTTP requests.

  ```js
  import icon from './icon.svg';
  console.log(icon); // outputs the base64-encoded string of icon.svg
  ```

- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">asset/source</span>: Exports the source code of the asset. Previously achievable by using `raw-loader`. This is useful for assets that should be included as raw content, like HTML, CSS or Text files.

  ```js
  import readme from './README.txt';
  console.log(readme); // outputs the content of README.txt
  ```

- <span style="color: SpringGreen;">asset</span>: This type of module automatically chooses between emitting a separate file and inlining the asset as a base64-encoded string based on the file size. The default threshold is `8 KB`, but this can be customized. Previously achievable by using `url-loader` with asset size limit. Useful when you want to optimize for both performance and bundle size without having to manually configure the asset type for each file. We don't have to install any asset module before using it because unlike loaders, webpack already comes equipped with them.

  ```js
  import smallImage from './smallImage.png';
  import largeImage from './largeImage.png';
  console.log(smallImage); // outputs base64-encoded string of smallImage.png
  console.log(largeImage); // outputs the URL of largeImage.png
  ```

**<u>EXAMPLE USAGE OF ASSET MODULES:</u>**

```js
module: {
    rules: [
      { test: /\.(png|jpg|gif)$/i, type: 'asset/resource' },
      { test: /\.svg$/, type: 'asset/inline' },
      { test: /\.txt$/, type: 'asset/source' },
      { test: /\.(png|jpg|gif)$/i, type: 'asset', parser: { dataUrlCondition: { maxSize: 4 * 1024 } } },
    ],
  },
```

</div>
