<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

<div style="border: 3px solid Red; background: #fdf5d8; color: black; padding: 10px; font-weight: bold;">The tools in this guide are only meant for development, please avoid using them in production!</div>

<br>

# Using source maps

When webpack bundles your source code, it can become difficult to track down errors and warnings to their original location. For example, if you bundle three source files (`a.js`, `b.js`, and `c.js`) into one bundle (`bundle.js`) and one of the source files contains an error, the stack trace will point to bundle.js. This isn't always helpful as you probably want to know exactly which source file the error came from.

In order to make it easier to track down errors and warnings, JavaScript offers source maps, which map your compiled code back to your original source code. If an error originates from b.js, the source map will tell you exactly that.

There are a lot of <a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/devtool/">different options</a> available when it comes to source maps. Be sure to check them out so you can configure them to your needs. `eval-source-map`, `inline-source-map` are generally used.

<span style="color: Cyan;">devtool</span> option controls if and how source maps are generated. We have to set it `false` for prodcution mode and pass a string containing name of devtool for development mode.

```js
module.exports = {
  //...
  devtool: 'inline-source-map',
};
```

<br>

# <a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/dev-server/">webpack-dev-server</a>

`webpack-dev-server` is a development server that provides live reloading, HMR (Hot Module Replacement), and an efficient development experience with webpack. It is particularly useful for building modern JavaScript applications as it serves bundled files from memory, reducing the need for repeated file reads/writes on disk. In `webpack 5`, `webpack-dev-server` has seen significant updates to improve performance, configuration, and usability.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Key Features</h3>

- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Serves your application:</b> It creates a local development server, allowing you to access your application in a browser without the need for a separate web server.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Hot Module Replacement (HMR):</b> When you make changes to your code, the dev server updates only the affected parts of the application, without a full page reload, providing a faster development experience.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Live reloading:</b> If HMR is not supported by your application, the dev server can automatically refresh the entire page when changes are detected.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">In-Memory Compilation:</b> Serves files from memory instead of writing to disk, resulting in faster build times.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Development-specific features:</b> Provides features like source maps, error overlays, and more for debugging.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Proxying:</b> Can proxy requests to an API server, allowing you to bypass CORS issues.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Custom Middleware:</b> Allows the addition of custom middleware for specific needs.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">INSTALLATION</h3>

```bash
npm install webpack-dev-server --save-dev
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">USAGE</h3>

```js
const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  // ...
  devServer: { static: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'), compress: true, port: 9000, hot: true, open: true },
};
```

`webpack-dev-server` doesn't write any output files after compiling. Instead, it keeps bundle files in memory and serves them as if they were real files mounted at the server's root path. If your page expects to find the bundle files on a different path, you can change this with the `devMiddleware.publicPath` option in the dev server's configuration.

**IMPORTANT CONFIGURATION OPTIONS:**

- <span style="color: Violet;">static</span>: This option allows configuring options for serving static files from the directory. These static files can include HTML, CSS, images, and other assets that are not processed by webpack. <span style="color: Lime;">By defauly, `index.html` file is served and if that is not found, blank page is served.</span>

  - directory (string): The directory to serve static files from. It can be absolute or relative path.
  - multiple directories (array): it specifies multiple directories from which to serve static files.
  - boolean: It simply enables or disables serving static files from the directory (which is the `public` by default).
  - <a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/dev-server/#devserverstatic">object</a>
- <span style="color: Violet;">historyApiFallback</span>: Useful for single-page applications (SPAs) that rely on client-side routing. Redirects all `404` requests to the `index.html` if passed `true`. We can configure the default html file to be served also by passing object: `historyApiFallback: { index: "/PrintApiData.html" }` => serves `PrintApiData.html` instead of `index.html` if 404 occurs. Default: `false`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">app</span>: Allows to use custom server applications, such as `connect`, `fastify`, etc. The default application used is `express`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">port</span>: Specifies the port on which the server will listen. Default: `8080`
- <span style="color: Violet;">host</span>: Specifies the hostname or IP address on which the server will listen. Default: `localhost`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">compress</span>: Enables <a href="https://betterexplained.com/articles/how-to-optimize-your-site-with-gzip-compression/">gzip compression</a> for everything. Default: `false`
- <span style="color: Violet;">hot</span>: Enables Hot Module Replacement (HMR) to update modules without a full reload. Default: `true` in development mode.
- <span style="color: Violet;">open</span>: Opens the browser after the server is started. Default: `false`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">server</span>: Allows to set server and options. Default: `http`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">client</span>: Used to configure the behavior of the client-side code that communicates with the webpack-dev-server running on the development server.
  - <span style="color: Magenta;">logging</span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">('log' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' | 'none' | 'verbose')</span> Allows to set log level in the browser, e.g. before reloading, before an error or when Hot Module Replacement is enabled. For example if set to `'error'`, just error logs will be displayed.
  - <span style="color: Magenta;">overlay</span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">(boolean | object)</span> Shows a full-screen overlay in the browser when there are compiler errors or warnings. We can pass object consisting of keys - `errors` (compilation error), `runtimeErrors` (unhandled runtime error) and `warnings` (compilation warnings) to get more granular control.
  - <span style="color: Magenta;">reconnect</span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">(boolean | number)</span> Tells dev-server the number of times it should try to reconnect the client. When true it will try to reconnect unlimited times.
- <span style="color: Violet;">devMiddleware.<span style="color: Orange;">writeToDisk</span></span>: This option will instruct the module to write files to the configured location on disk as specified in webpack config file. Setting `writeToDisk: true` won't change the behavior of the <a href="https://github.com/webpack/webpack-dev-middleware">webpack-dev-middleware</a>, and bundle files accessed through the browser will still be served from memory. Default: `false`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">devMiddleware.<span style="color: Orange;">index</span></span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">(boolean | string)</span> Used to specify the filename that should be served as the default file when a directory is requested. By default, when we request a directory (through `static` option), the middleware will try to serve the `index.html` file within that directory. However, this behaviour can be customized by setting this option to a different filename. If it is set to `false`, webpack dev server will not serve the `index.html` file automatically when the root URL (e.g., `http://localhost:9000/`) is accessed. Instead, it will behave as though there is no default file, and it will either serve a directory listing (if directory listing is enabled) or result in a 404 error (if directory listing is disabled).

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">RUNNING DEV SERVER</h3>

The following command can be used to run `webpack-dev-server`:

```bash
npx webpack serve
```

However, generally we run it through `start` script:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "start": "webpack serve"
  }
}
```

</div>
