<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Module Federation

Module Federation allows multiple separate builds to form a single application, acting as containers that can expose and consume code among themselves. It is particularly designed for micro-frontend architectures, where different parts of the UI are developed independently and combined at runtime. This approach supports independent development, testing, and deployment, reducing coordination overhead and enabling faster development cycles.

The feature is not limited to micro-frontends; it can be used for any scenario requiring dynamic code sharing, such as lazy loading features or sharing components across applications. It leverages Webpack's module bundling capabilities to handle asynchronous loading and dependency management, making it a game-changer for JavaScript architecture.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Key Concepts</h3>

<b style="color:Khaki;">1. Federated Modules:</b> Federated Modules are Webpack builds configured to expose or consume modules from other builds. Each application or module can be treated as an independent entity with its own dependencies and Webpack configuration. These builds are also referred as <span style="color: Cyan;">containers</span>.<br>
<b style="color:Khaki;">2. Host and Remote:</b>

- <span style="color: Lime;">Host:</span> The application that consumes modules from other applications at runtime.
- <span style="color: Lime;">Remote:</span> The application exposing its modules to be consumed by other applications.
- <span style="color: Lime;">Bidirectional-Host:</span> The bidirectional host is an artifact that can be both a host or a remote, consuming other applications or being consumed by others.

Also, the modules that are part of the current build are called <span style="color: Cyan;">local modules</span> and modules that are not part of the current build but are loaded at runtime from a remote container are called <span style="color: Cyan;">remote modules</span>.
<br>

<b style="color:Khaki;">3. Shared Dependencies:</b> Module Federation allows applications to share common dependencies like React or Lodash. This reduces redundancy and improves performance by avoiding duplicate code in the final bundle.<br>
<b style="color:Khaki;">4. Runtime Integration:</b> Module Federation loads and integrates modules during <u style="color: Crimson;">runtime</u>, enabling true decoupling of microservices or micro-frontends. Hence, remote modules are not available immediately during application runtime. They are fetched asynchronously from the remote container. Therefore, to use a remote module, there must be a <span style="color: HotPink;">chunk loading operation</span> <u>(a mechanism to dynamically load JavaScript chunks during runtime like `import()` for simple JS data or `React.lazy()` to fetch react components)</u> to handle the asynchronous nature of fetching the remote code.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Principles of Module Federation</h3>

<b style="color:PaleGreen;">1. Universal Module Support:</b> It should be possible to expose and consume any module type that webpack supports (e.g., JavaScript ES Modules, CommonJS, AMD, JSON, or WASM). This ensures compatibility with existing codebases and modern module systems, making it flexible for different application architectures.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">2. Efficient Chunk Loading:</b> When a remote module is consumed, all its required dependencies (chunks) are fetched in parallel. For example, if a remote module `B` requires several other files (`B.js`, `B1.js`, `B2.js`), Webpack ensures they are loaded in a single request or parallel requests to reduce latency.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">3. Consumer-Controlled Integration:</b> The consumer (the application importing a remote module) has full control over what to import from the container (remote app) and how the imported module is used in its build. This ensures the host app dictates how dependencies are managed and avoids unintentional behavior from the remote container.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">4. One-Directional Overriding:</b> Overriding happens when the consumer provides its own version of a shared module (e.g., React). The container cannot override the consumer’s modules. This prevents sibling containers or remotes from accidentally interfering with each other. And obviously, sibling containers cannot override each other's modules.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">5. Shared Module Requests:</b> Shared modules are typically libraries (e.g., React, Lodash) that multiple applications or micro-frontends need. Webpack optimizes these shared modules to avoid redundancy, reduce bundle size, and ensure compatibility across applications.

<br>

To use Module Federation, we need to configure the <span style="color: Coral;">ModuleFederationPlugin</span> in Webpack configuration file. No need to install it separately, Webpack comes equipped with it. Here’s an example of using module federation:

```js
// App1/src/index.js

const appName = 'Application-1';
export default appName;
```

```js
// App1/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  //......
  plugins: [
    //......
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'App1',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      exposes: {
        './app1Index': './src',
      },
    }),
  ],
};
```

```js
// Container/src/index.js

import('App1/app1Index')
  .then((module) => {
    console.log(module.default);
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.log({ error });
  });
```

```js
// Container/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  // .....
  plugins: [
    // ....
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'App2',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      remotes: {
        App1: 'App1@http://localhost:3001/remoteEntry.js',
      },
    }),
  ],
};
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Remote Application Configuration Options</h3>

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">name</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(string)</span>: A unique identifier for the container. This name is used to reference the container in other applications when consuming its modules.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">filename</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(string)</span>: Specifies the file name for the output bundle that acts as an entry point for the federated modules. This file contains metadata about exposed modules, shared dependencies, and initialization code to integrate the remote's functionality into the host. It acts as an entry point, allowing the host to dynamically load and use the remote's modules without needing to know their implementation details. Example: `"remoteEntry.js"`. It's a convention also to name it like this and it is default value also.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">exposes</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(object)</span>: Defines which modules from this container can be used by other containers. It is an object where keys are the names under which modules are exposed, and values are paths to the modules.

  ```js
  module.exports = {
    plugins: [
      new ModuleFederation({
        name: 'provider',
        exposes: {
          // Note: "./" is not supported. Exporting as `.` indicates a default export
          '.': './src/index.tsx',
          './add': './src/utils/add.ts',
          './Button': './src/components/Button.tsx',
        },
      }),
    ],
  };
  ```

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">remotes</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(object)</span>: Lists the remote containers from which this container can consume modules. Each key is a local alias for the remote module, and the value is the path or function returning the path to the remote container's entry file. The `remotes` object is a mapping where:

  - **Key:** The name you'll use to reference the remote container in your code.
  - **Value:** A string that specifies the remote container's unique name and entry file location - `"remoteName@remoteUrl/remoteEntry.js"`. Parts of the value:
    - `remoteName`: The name of the remote container, as defined in its `ModuleFederationPlugin` `name` option.
    - `remoteUrl/remoteEntry.js`: The URL where the remote container's entry point (`remoteEntry.js`) is hosted.

  ```js
  new ModuleFederationPlugin({
    remotes: {
      remoteApp: 'remoteApp@http://localhost:3001/remoteEntry.js',
    },
  });
  ```

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">shared </b><span style="color: Magenta;">(array | object)</span>: It configures how dependencies are shared between the host and remote containers in a Module Federation setup. Purpose:

  1. **Reduce Duplication:** Avoid multiple copies of the same library being loaded by different containers.
  2. **Ensure Compatibility:** Enforce version compatibility across containers.
  3. **Optimize Performance:** Minimize download size by using already-loaded dependencies when possible.

  The host application, which consumes modules from remote applications, provides the shared dependencies. Remote applications, which expose modules for the host, do not bundle these shared dependencies but instead use the host's version. This is managed through the `shared` option in the `ModuleFederationPlugin`, <u>ensuring both host and remote agree on the dependencies and their versions.</u>

  <b style="color:red;">NOTE:</b> Both host and remote must configure the `shared` option with the same version to ensure compatibility, using options like `requiredVersion` and `singleton` for management.

    <b style="color:HotPink;">NOTE-2:</b> A surprising benefit is that it ensures only one instance of libraries with global state, like `React`, avoiding bugs from multiple versions.

  For example, to share `React`, both configurations might look like:

  ```js
  shared: {
  react: {
    requiredVersion: '17.0.2',
    singleton: true,
   },
  }
  ```

  Here, `requiredVersion` specifies the needed version, and `singleton` ensures only one instance is used, preventing bugs from multiple React instances.

  - <span style="color: Violet;">Array syntax</span>: Simplest form where you list dependencies to share without additional configuration.

    ```js
    shared: ['react', 'react-dom'];
    ```

  - <span style="color: Violet;">Object syntax</span>: This syntax provides more control over each shared library in which one can define package name as the key and version (semver) as the value.vThis syntax allows to provide additional hints to each shared package where we define the package name as the key, and the value as an object containing hints to modify sharing behavior.

    ```js
    shared: {
      react: { singleton: true, eager: true, requiredVersion: "^17.0.1" },
      "react-dom": { singleton: true, eager: true, requiredVersion: "^17.0.1" }
    }
    ```

    <u>Configurations:</u>

    - <span style="color: Salmon;">singleton</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(boolean [Default: true])</span>
      - If set to `true`, singleton mode is enabled; if set to `false`, singleton mode is not enabled.
      - If singleton mode is enabled, the shared dependencies between the remote application components and the host application will only be loaded once, and a higher version will be loaded if the versions are inconsistent. A warning will be given for the party with the lower version.
      - If singleton mode is not enabled, and the shared dependencies between the remote application and the host application have different versions, each will load their own dependencies.
    - <span style="color: Salmon;">eager</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(boolean [Default: false])</span> Determines whether a shared dependency is bundled immediately (eagerly) or loaded lazily at runtime. If set to `true`, the dependency is included in the initial bundle, improving runtime performance but increasing bundle size. When set to `false`, the dependency is loaded asynchronously only when needed, reducing initial load time but adding runtime overhead.
    - <span style="color: Salmon;">requiredVersion</span> : Specifies the required version of the dependency. If the host and remote specify different `requiredVersion` for a shared dependency, it can lead to errors. Module Federation resolves this by using the highest semantic version if multiple versions are present, but mismatches can cause runtime issues. If `requiredVersion` is not provided itself and `singleton` is `true`, Module Federation still ensures only one instance of the dependency is loaded and shared across the host and remote(s). The host provides its version of the dependency from its `node_modules`, and the remote uses it without bundling its own, assuming compatibility. In this case, there's no explicit version check, so mismatches can lead to runtime errors if the host's version differs significantly from what the remote expects.

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(103, 114, 230, 0.2);">

At runtime, when the host loads, it bundles the shared dependencies, such as React, into its bundle. When the remote is loaded, its code does not include React but instead uses the host's version. This is managed through the Module Federation runtime, where the remote's modules are loaded, and their dependencies are resolved using the host's shared dependencies.

For example, if the remote's component imports React, it gets the host's React instance, ensuring consistency. This behavior is facilitated by the container setup, where the remote's `remoteEntry.js` is loaded, and shared dependencies are resolved dynamically.
</div>

<br>

**<u>EXAMPLE CODE (with shared config)**</u>

```js
// App1/src/index.js

import('./bootstrap.js');
```

```js
// App1/src/bootstrap.js

import _ from 'lodash';

const obj = {
  key: 'value',
};

console.log('App1: ', _.get(obj, 'key'));

export default obj;
```

```js
// App1/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  //....
  plugins: [
    //....
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'App1',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      exposes: {
        './app1Index': './src/bootstrap',
      },
      shared: ['lodash'],
    }),
  ],
};
```

```js
// Container/src/index.js

import('./bootstrap.js');
```

```js
// Container/src/bootstrap.js

import _ from 'lodash';

import('App1/app1Index')
  .then((module) => {
    console.log('Container: ', _.get(module, 'default.key'));
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.log({ error });
  });
```

```js
// Container/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  //....
  plugins: [
    //....
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'Container',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      remotes: {
        App1: 'App1@http://localhost:3001/remoteEntry.js',
      },
      shared: ['lodash'],
    }),
  ],
};
```

</div>
