<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

Plugins are a powerful way to extend and customize the build process. They perform a wide range of tasks from bundle optimization, asset management, injecting environment variables, generating new files and much more. Unlike loaders, which only transform individual files, plugins can influence the entire build process and provide more comprehensive and flexible features.

In order to use a plugin, you need to install it (if it doesn't come with webpack), `require()` it and then add it to the <span style="color: Cyan;">plugins</span> array. Most plugins are customizable through options. Since you can use a plugin multiple times in a configuration for different purposes, you need to create an instance of it by calling it with the `new` operator.

```js
// webpack.config.js
const HtmlWebpackPlugin = require('html-webpack-plugin');
const webpack = require('webpack'); //to access built-in plugins

module.exports = {
  module: {
    rules: [{ test: /\.txt$/, use: 'raw-loader' }],
  },
  plugins: [new HtmlWebpackPlugin({ template: './src/index.html' })],
};
```

In the example above, the `html-webpack-plugin` generates an HTML file for your application and automatically injects all your generated bundles into this file.

A webpack plugin is a JavaScript object that has an <b style="color:OrangeRed;">apply</b> method. This method is called by the webpack compiler, giving access to the entire compilation lifecycle.

```js
// ConsoleLogOnBuildWebpackPlugin.js

const pluginName = 'ConsoleLogOnBuildWebpackPlugin';

class ConsoleLogOnBuildWebpackPlugin {
  apply(compiler) {
    compiler.hooks.run.tap(pluginName, (compilation) => {
      console.log('The webpack build process is starting!');
    });
  }
}

module.exports = ConsoleLogOnBuildWebpackPlugin;
```

It is recommended that the first parameter of the tap method of the compiler hook should be a caramelized version of the plugin name. It is advisable to use a constant for this so it can be reused in all hooks.

Since plugins can take arguments/options, you must pass a `new` instance to the plugins property in your webpack configuration. Depending on how you are using webpack, there are multiple ways to use plugins.

```js
// webpack.config.js

const HtmlWebpackPlugin = require('html-webpack-plugin');
const webpack = require('webpack'); //to access built-in plugins
const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  entry: './path/to/my/entry/file.js',
  output: {
    filename: 'my-first-webpack.bundle.js',
    path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'),
  },
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.(js|jsx)$/,
        use: 'babel-loader',
      },
    ],
  },
  plugins: [new webpack.ProgressPlugin(), new HtmlWebpackPlugin({ template: './src/index.html' })],
};
```

The `ProgressPlugin` is used to customize how progress should be reported during compilation, and `HtmlWebpackPlugin` will generate a HTML file including the `my-first-webpack.bundle.js` file using a script tag. Below are some commonly used plugins:

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;"><a href="https://github.com/jantimon/html-webpack-plugin">HTMLWebpackPlugin</a></h3>

Installation:

```
npm install html-webpack-plugin --save-dev
```

The plugin will generate an HTML5 file for you that includes all your webpack bundles in the head using `script` tags. The directory in which this file is generated is by default set to `output.path`, however, it is configurable using `filename` option (explained below). This is especially useful for webpack bundles that include a hash in the filename which changes every compilation. Just add the plugin to your webpack config as follows:

```js
const HtmlWebpackPlugin = require('html-webpack-plugin');

module.exports = {
  entry: 'index.js',
  output: {
    path: __dirname + '/dist',
    filename: 'index_bundle.js',
  },
  plugins: [new HtmlWebpackPlugin()],
};
```

This will generate a file `dist/index.html` containing the following:

```html
<!-- dist/index.html -->
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8" />
    <title>Webpack App</title>
    <script defer src="index_bundle.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body></body>
</html>
```

**<i>If you have multiple webpack entry points, they will all be included with `<script>` tags in the generated HTML. If you have any CSS assets in webpack's output (for example, CSS extracted with the `mini-css-extract-plugin`) then these will be included with `<link>` tags in the HTML head.</i>**

**CONFIGURATION OPTIONS**

- <span style="color: Cyan;">filename</span> [`String` | `Function`]: Specifies the name of the output HTML file. It can take placeholder's like `[name]` also. We can also include the absolute directory to specify the location of generated file -> `path.resolve(__dirname, '../public', 'index.html')` <span style="color: CRIMSON">[THIS SHOULD NOT BE DONE! SOME ERROR OCCURS, BUNDLE DOESN'T LOAD]</span>. And it can be function also - `(entryName) => entryName + '.html'`
- <span style="color: Cyan;">inject</span> [`Boolean` | `String ('body' / 'head')`]: Specifies where to inject the generated bundles in the HTML file.  When passing 'body' all javascript resources will be placed at the bottom of the body element. 'head' will place the scripts in the head element. Passing true will add it to the head/body depending on the scriptLoading option. Passing false will disable automatic injections. Default: `true`.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">title</span> [`String`]: Sets document title of generated html file. Default: 'My App'.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">favicon</span> [`String`]: Path to the favicon to use in the HTML.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">meta</span> [`Object`]: Allows you to add meta tags to the HTML document. The keys are the meta tag names and the values are the meta tag content.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">template</span> [`String`]: Absolute path to the template file that the plugin will use to generate the final HTML file for your application. It can be an HTML file or a template engine like `EJS`, `Pug` or `Handlebars` (template engines allow more advanced templating capabilities, such as loops, conditionals, and more). Default - `src/index.ejs`. This template file can contain placeholders and special syntax that the plugin will replace with the appropriate values, such as the paths to your bundled JavaScript and CSS files. Below is an example `.ejs` file and to know more about variables available in the template, visit link in heading of this plugin.

  ```html
  <!DOCTYPE html>
  <html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <title><%= htmlWebpackPlugin.options.title %></title>
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="app"></div>
    <!-- html-webpack-plugin will inject scripts here -->
  </body>
  </html>
  ```
- <span style="color: Cyan;">templateParameters</span> [`Boolean|Object|Function`]: Allows to overwrite the parameters used in the template if `true`. Default: `true`. See link above for more detail.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">cache</span> [`Boolean`]: If `true`, this option will only emit the file when it was changed. Default: `true`.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">scriptLoading</span> [`String ('blocking' | 'defer' | 'module')`]: Changes the script loading behavior. `'defer'` loads scripts asynchronously, while `'module'` is for ES modules. Default: `'defer'`.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">minify</span> [`Boolean` | `Object`]: It reduces the size of the HTML file by removing whitespace, comments, and unnecessary characters. This is particularly useful in production. Default - `true` if `mode` is `'production'`, otherwise `false`. If it is `true`, the generated HTML will be minified using `html-minifier-terser` and the following options:

  ```js
  {
    collapseWhitespace: true,
    keepClosingSlash: true,
    removeComments: true,
    removeRedundantAttributes: true,
    removeScriptTypeAttributes: true,
    removeStyleLinkTypeAttributes: true,
    useShortDoctype: true
  }
  ```

  But to configure other `html-minifier-terser` options, we can pass an object to minify instead. Some others that are generally added are `minifyJS`, `minifyCSS` and `minifyURLs`. Refer this link for all of them and their details : <a href="https://github.com/DanielRuf/html-minifier-terser#options-quick-reference">html-minifier-terser</a>


<br><div style="border: 3px solid HotPink; padding: 10px;">EXPOLORE THIS PLUGIN FOR USING HtmlWebpackPlugin WITH RESOURCE HINTS (`prefetc`, `preconnect`, etc.) -> <a href="https://github.com/jantimon/resource-hints-webpack-plugin">resource-hints-webpack-plugin</a></div><br>


<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">HotModuleReplacementPlugin (Built-in)</h3>

It is a feature of Webpack that allows modules to be updated in the browser without requiring a full page reload. This is particularly useful in development as it provides a smoother and faster development experience by preserving the application state while applying updates. When a module is updated, Webpack sends a message to the running application. The application then uses Webpack’s HMR runtime to update the specific module in place without a full reload. If the module cannot be updated safely, a full reload is performed. HMR should never be used in production.

When using `webpack-dev-server`, HMR will typically establish a WebSocket connection to listen for changes in the code. This allows for modules to be replaced in the browser without a full reload.

**<----------------------------------APPLYING IT IS A BIT COMPLEX MECHANISM! STUDY IT LATER!---------------------------------->**

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">TerserWebpackPlugin</h3>

This plugin uses Terser to minify your JavaScript. Minification is a process of removing unnecessary characters from the code (like spaces, comments, and line breaks) and shortening variable names, which reduces the size of the files and improves the loading time of your web application. Webpack v5 comes equipped with the latest `terser-webpack-plugin` out of the box, so no need to install it separately.

This plugin should only be used in Production mode and it is already used by default, so no need to add it manually.

We can add this plugin to the optimization section of Webpack configuration.

```js
const TerserWebpackPlugin = require('terser-webpack-plugin');

module.exports = {
  //...
  optimization: { minimize: true, /* <- Enable minimization */ minimizer: [new TerserWebpackPlugin()] },
};
```

We can customize the behavior of TerserWebpackPlugin by passing options to its constructor:

```js
new TerserWebpackPlugin({
  terserOptions: {
    compress: {
      drop_console: true, // Drops console statements
    },
    format: {
      comments: false, // Removes comments
    },
  },
  extractComments: false, // Prevents extracting comments to a separate file
});
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;"><a href="https://webpack.js.org/plugins/mini-css-extract-plugin/">MiniCssExtractPlugin</a></h3>

This plugin extracts CSS into separate files. It creates a CSS file per JavaScript file which contains CSS. This is particularly useful for production builds where you want to keep your CSS separate from your JavaScript to improve loading times and caching by reducing js bundle size and loading both CSS and JS file in parallel and take advantage of browser-level caching.

For development, it should not be used because extracting CSS into separate files can slow down the build process, which is undesirable during development when fast feedback is crucial.

**INSTALLATION:**

```bash
npm install mini-css-extract-plugin --save-dev
```

**USAGE:**

```js
const MiniCssExtractPlugin = require('mini-css-extract-plugin');
const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  entry: './src/index.js',
  output: {
    filename: 'bundle.js',
    path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'),
  },
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /\.css$/i,
        use: [
          MiniCssExtractPlugin.loader, // Extracts CSS into separate files
          'css-loader', // Translates CSS into CommonJS modules
        ],
      },
      {
        test: /\.scss$/i,
        use: [
          MiniCssExtractPlugin.loader, // Extracts CSS into separate files
          'css-loader', // Translates CSS into CommonJS modules
          'sass-loader', // Compiles Sass to CSS
        ],
      },
    ],
  },
  plugins: [
    new MiniCssExtractPlugin({
      filename: '[name].[contenthash].styles.css', // Output filename for extracted CSS (hash is added for cache busting)
    }),
  ],
};
```

We can configure this plugin using options. Some of them are:

- <span style="color: Cyan;">filename</span>: A string which specifies the name of the output CSS file. We can use placeholders such as `[name]`, `[id]`, `[contenthash]` to customize the file name. Also can include directory (e.g. `css/[name].[hash].styles.css`) to generate CSS bundles in separate folder in `dist` (default output path).
- <span style="color: Cyan;">chunkFilename</span>: Specifies the name of the non-entry CSS files. We can use placeholders.
- <span style="color: Cyan;">ignoreOrder</span>: Boolean value which disables order warnings when CSS imports are out of order.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">CssMinimizerWebpackPlugin</h3>

This plugin is used to optimize and minimize CSS files. It is particularly useful in production builds to reduce the size of CSS files, which can improve loading times and overall performance of web applications.

**FEATURES**

- **CSS Optimization:** It uses `cssnano` under the hood, a modular minifier based on the `PostCSS` ecosystem. `cssnano` provides a range of optimizations, such as removing comments, whitespace, and unnecessary properties, as well as more advanced transformations like merging rules.
- **Source Map Support:** It can generate source maps, which help in debugging minified CSS by mapping the minified code back to the original source code.
- **Cache Support:** Supports caching for faster builds by reusing previously optimized CSS when the source hasn't changed.
- **Parallel Processing:** Utilizes worker threads to optimize CSS in parallel, speeding up the build process on multi-core systems.

**INSTALLATION**

```bash
npm install css-minimizer-webpack-plugin --save-dev
```

**EXAMPLE USAGE**

```js
const MiniCssExtractPlugin = require("mini-css-extract-plugin");
const CssMinimizerPlugin = require("css-minimizer-webpack-plugin");

module.exports = {
  module: {
    rules: [
      {
        test: /.s?css$/,
        use: [MiniCssExtractPlugin.loader, "css-loader", "sass-loader"],
      },
    ],
  },
  optimization: {
    minimizer: [
      // For webpack@5 we can use the `...` syntax to extend existing minimizers (i.e. `terser-webpack-plugin`)
      `...`,
      new CssMinimizerPlugin(),
    ],
  },
  plugins: [new MiniCssExtractPlugin()],
};
```

<b style="color:red;">NOTE</b>: This will enable CSS optimization only in production mode. If running it in development is also needed, set `the optimization.minimize` option to `true`.

**CONFIGURATION OPTIONS**

- <span style="color: Chartreuse;">**minify**</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(Function | Array of functions : Default - <u>CssMinimizerPlugin.cssnanoMinify</u>)</span> Allows to override default minify function. Example: `[CssMinimizerPlugin.cssnanoMinify, CssMinimizerPlugin.cleanCssMinify]`
- <span style="color: Chartreuse;">**test**</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(String | RegExp | Array< String | RegExp > : Default - <u>/\.css(\?.*)?$/i</u>)</span> Specifies a regex pattern to match files that should be minimized.
- <span style="color: Chartreuse;">**parallel**</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(boolean : Default - <u>true</u>)</span> When set to `true`, uses worker threads to optimize CSS in parallel.
- <span style="color: Chartreuse;">**minimizerOptions**</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(Object | Array of Objects : Default - <u>{ preset: 'default' }</u>)</span> Passes custom options to `cssnano`, allowing further customization of the CSS optimization process.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">PurgeCSSPlugin</h3>

This plugin integrates `PurgeCSS` into Webpack build process. `PurgeCSS` is a tool that analyzes your content files (e.g., HTML, JavaScript, Vue, React) and removes unused CSS, significantly reducing the size of your CSS files. This is particularly useful in production builds to improve loading times and performance.

It's particularly useful when working with large CSS frameworks like Bootstrap or Tailwind CSS where we often end up with a lot of unused styles.

**INSTALLATION:**

```bash
npm install purgecss-webpack-plugin glob-all --save-dev
```

**BASIC USAGE:**

```js
const path = require('path');
const HtmlWebpackPlugin = require('html-webpack-plugin');
const CssMinimizerWebpackPlugin = require('css-minimizer-webpack-plugin');
const PurgeCSSPlugin = require('purgecss-webpack-plugin');
const glob = require('glob-all');

// Define paths to your source files
const PATHS = {
  src: path.join(__dirname, 'src'),
};

module.exports = {
  mode: 'production',
  entry: './src/index.js',
  output: { filename: 'bundle.js', path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist') },
  module: { rules: [{ test: /\.css$/i, use: ['style-loader', 'css-loader'] }] },
  plugins: [ new HtmlWebpackPlugin({ template: './src/index.html' }),
    new PurgeCSSPlugin({
      paths: glob.sync(`${PATHS.src}/**/*`, { nodir: true }), // Specify the files to scan for used CSS classes
    }),
  ],
  optimization: { minimize: true, minimizer: ['...', new CssMinimizerWebpackPlugin() ] },
};
```

**WORKFLOW:**

- `PurgeCSS` scans the specified content files to find used CSS selectors.
- Unused CSS selectors are removed from the final CSS output.
- `CssMinimizerWebpackPlugin` then minifies the remaining CSS to reduce file size further.

**CONFIGURATION OPTIONS:**

- <span style="color: HotPink;">**paths**</span>: This option is mandatory and specifies the files PurgeCSS should scan to determine which CSS selectors are used. You can use glob patterns to specify the files.
- <span style="color: HotPink;">**only**</span>This option restricts the plugin to only certain chunks. This is useful if you only want to apply PurgeCSS to specific parts of your build.


<b style="color:Yellow;">**<----------------------------------IMAGE OPTIMIZATION PLUGINS---------------------------------->**</b>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">BundleAnalyzerPlugin</h3>

This plugin helps developers visualize the size of the output files (bundles) created during the build process. It provides an interactive, zoomable treemap of the contents of all bundles, allowing you to see the size of each module, which can help you optimize your bundle size and identify any unexpected large dependencies.

**INSTALLATION:**

```bash
npm install --save-dev webpack-bundle-analyzer
```

**USAGE:**

```js
const { BundleAnalyzerPlugin } = require('webpack-bundle-analyzer');

module.exports = {
  // other configuration options
  plugins: [
    new BundleAnalyzerPlugin()
  ],
};
```

This configuration will generate a visualization of your bundle and automatically open it in your default web browser when you build your project.

</div>
