<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

<div style="border: 3px solid Red; background: #fdf5d8; color: black; padding: 10px; font-weight: bold;">The tools in this guide are only meant for development, please avoid using them in production!</div>

<br>

# Using source maps

When webpack bundles your source code, it can become difficult to track down errors and warnings to their original location. For example, if you bundle three source files (`a.js`, `b.js`, and `c.js`) into one bundle (`bundle.js`) and one of the source files contains an error, the stack trace will point to bundle.js. This isn't always helpful as you probably want to know exactly which source file the error came from.

In order to make it easier to track down errors and warnings, JavaScript offers source maps, which map your compiled code back to your original source code. If an error originates from b.js, the source map will tell you exactly that.

There are a lot of <a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/devtool/">different options</a> available when it comes to source maps. Be sure to check them out so you can configure them to your needs. `eval-source-map`, `inline-source-map` are generally used.

<span style="color: Cyan;">devtool</span> option controls if and how source maps are generated. We have to set it `false` for prodcution mode and pass a string containing name of devtool for development mode.

```js
module.exports = {
  //...
  devtool: 'inline-source-map',
};
```

<br>

# <a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/dev-server/">webpack-dev-server</a>

It is a powerful development tool provided by webpack that serves your webpack app, watches for changes in your source files, and automatically refreshes the browser, making the development process faster and more efficient.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Key Features</h3>

- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Serves your application:</b> It creates a local development server, allowing you to access your application in a browser without the need for a separate web server.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Hot Module Replacement (HMR):</b> When you make changes to your code, the dev server updates only the affected parts of the application, without a full page reload, providing a faster development experience.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Live reloading:</b> If HMR is not supported by your application, the dev server can automatically refresh the entire page when changes are detected.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">In-Memory Compilation:</b> Serves files from memory instead of writing to disk, resulting in faster build times.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Development-specific features:</b> Provides features like source maps, error overlays, and more for debugging.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Proxying:</b> Can proxy requests to an API server, allowing you to bypass CORS issues.
- <b style="color:DarkKhaki;">Custom Middleware:</b> Allows the addition of custom middleware for specific needs.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">INSTALLATION</h3>

```bash
npm install webpack-dev-server --save-dev
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">USAGE</h3>

```js
const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  // ...
  devServer: { static: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'), compress: true, port: 9000, hot: true, open: true },
};
```

`webpack-dev-server` doesn't write any output files after compiling. Instead, it keeps bundle files in memory and serves them as if they were real files mounted at the server's root path. If your page expects to find the bundle files on a different path, you can change this with the `devMiddleware.publicPath` option in the dev server's configuration.

**IMPORTANT CONFIGURATION OPTIONS:**

- <span style="color: Violet;">static</span>: This option allows configuring options for serving static files from the directory. These static files can include HTML, CSS, images, and other assets that are not processed by webpack.

  - <i>directory (string):</i> The directory to serve static files from (it must be directory only, file name shouldn't be appended). Example: `path.join(__dirname, 'public')`
  - <i>multiple directories (array):</i> it specifies multiple directories from which to serve static files.
  - <i>boolean:</i> It simply enables or disables serving static files from the directory (which is the `public` by default).
  - <i><a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/dev-server/#devserverstatic">object</a></i>

  <b style="color:red;">NOTE:</b> If we need to serve from the bundle generated by Webpack (i.e., the output directory specified in your Webpack configuration), we don't typically need to use the `static` option explicitly. This option is mainly for serving static assets that are not part of the Webpack bundle, such as images, fonts, or HTML files that reside outside the `src` directory. When using `webpack-dev-server`, it automatically serves the files generated by Webpack from memory. The output directory specified in Webpack configuration (`output.path`) is not written to disk by default unless `writeToDisk` option is used.

- <span style="color: Violet;">app</span>: Allows to use custom server applications, such as `connect`, `fastify`, etc. The default application used is `express`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">port</span>: Specifies the port on which the server will listen. Default: `8080`
- <span style="color: Violet;">host</span>: Specifies the hostname or IP address on which the server will listen. Default: `localhost`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">compress</span>: Enables <a href="https://betterexplained.com/articles/how-to-optimize-your-site-with-gzip-compression/">gzip compression</a> for everything. Default: `false`
- <span style="color: Violet;">hot</span>: Enables Hot Module Replacement (HMR) to update modules without a full reload. Default: `true` in development mode.
- <span style="color: Violet;">open</span>: Opens the browser after the server is started. Default: `false`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">server</span>: Allows to set server and options. Default: `http`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">client</span>: Used to configure the behavior of the client-side code that communicates with the webpack-dev-server running on the development server.
  - <span style="color: Magenta;">logging</span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">('log' | 'info' | 'warn' | 'error' | 'none' | 'verbose')</span> Allows to set log level in the browser, e.g. before reloading, before an error or when Hot Module Replacement is enabled. For example if set to `'error'`, just error logs will be displayed.
  - <span style="color: Magenta;">overlay</span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">(boolean | object)</span> Shows a full-screen overlay in the browser when there are compiler errors or warnings. We can pass object consisting of keys - `errors` (compilation error), `runtimeErrors` (unhandled runtime error) and `warnings` (compilation warnings) to get more granular control.
  - <span style="color: Magenta;">reconnect</span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">(boolean | number)</span> Tells dev-server the number of times it should try to reconnect the client. When true it will try to reconnect unlimited times.
- <span style="color: Violet;">devMiddleware.<span style="color: Orange;">writeToDisk</span></span>: This option will instruct the module to write files to the configured location on disk as specified in webpack config file. Setting `writeToDisk: true` won't change the behavior of the <a href="https://github.com/webpack/webpack-dev-middleware">webpack-dev-middleware</a>, and bundle files accessed through the browser will still be served from memory. Default: `false`.
- <span style="color: Violet;">devMiddleware.<span style="color: Orange;">index</span></span>: <span style="color: Cyan;">(boolean | string)</span> Used to specify the filename that should be served as the default file when a directory is requested. By default, when we request a directory (through `static` option), the middleware will try to serve the `index.html` file within that directory. However, this behaviour can be customized by setting this option to a different filename. If it is set to `false`, webpack dev server will not serve the `index.html` file automatically when the root URL (e.g., `http://localhost:9000/`) is accessed. Instead, it will behave as though there is no default file, and it will either serve a directory listing (if directory listing is enabled) or result in a 404 error (if directory listing is disabled).

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">RUNNING DEV SERVER</h3>

The following command can be used to run `webpack-dev-server`:

```bash
npx webpack serve
```

However, generally we run it through `start` script:

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "start": "webpack serve"
  }
}
```

<br>

# <a href="https://webpack.js.org/guides/development/#using-webpack-dev-middleware">webpack-dev-middleware</a>

`webpack-dev-middleware` is a wrapper that will emit files processed by webpack to a server. This is used in `webpack-dev-server` internally, however it's available as a separate package to allow more custom setups if desired. It works with various `Node.js` server frameworks like `Express` or `Connect`.

**KEY FEATURES:**

- **In-Memory Compilation:** It keeps the Webpack bundle in memory and serves it directly from there over a connected server. This speeds up the development process since we don't have to write files to disk. It is particularly useful in a development environment where the files change frequently and instant feedback is desired.
- **Automatic Rebuilding:** When files are modified, Webpack automatically recompiles the bundle, and `webpack-dev-middleware` serves the updated bundle without needing a full page refresh.
- **Integrated with Webpack:** It directly interacts with the Webpack compiler, providing a seamless development experience with features like hot module replacement (HMR).

**EXAMPLE USAGE**

```js
// server/index.js

const express = require('express');
const webpack = require('webpack');
const webpackDevMiddleware = require('webpack-dev-middleware'); // Creates an instance of Webpack Dev Middleware

const app = express();
const config = require('./webpack.config.js');
const webpackCompiler = webpack(config); // Creates a Webpack compiler instance with the provided configuration.

// Set the base path for the bundled files. This should match the `publicPath` option in the Webpack configuration.
const webpackDevMiddlewareConfigOptions = {
  publicPath: config.output.publicPath
};

// Initializes the middleware with the Webpack compiler and options.
const middleware = webpackDevMiddleware(webpackCompiler, webpackDevMiddlewareConfigOptions);

//  Integrates the middleware into the Express application.
app.use(middleware);


// Start the server and serve the files on port 3000.
app.listen(3000, function () {
  console.log('Example app listening on port 3000!\n');
});
```

**RUNNING ABOVE CODE**

```bash
node server # if server file is in root folder and it's name is server.js => node server.js
```

<b style="color:Yellow;">**<----------------------------------LEARN ADDITION OF HMR THROUGH PLUGIN---------------------------------->**</b>

</div>
