<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Caching

So we're using webpack to bundle our modular application which yields a deployable `/dist` directory. Once the contents of `/dist` have been deployed to a server, clients (typically browsers) will hit that server to grab the site and its assets. The last step can be time consuming, which is why browsers use a technique called <u style="color: Chartreuse;">caching</u>.

Browser caching is a mechanism for storing web resources (like HTML, CSS, JavaScript, images, etc.) on the user's local machine. This allows the browser to reuse these resources for subsequent requests, reducing the need to fetch them from the server again. This can significantly improve page load times and reduce server load. However, it can also cause headaches when we need new code to be picked up.

When a file's name changes, the browser will treat it as a new resource and fetch it from the server instead of using the cached version. This mechanism is essential for effective cache invalidation and ensuring that users always receive the latest versions of assets.

<span style="color: HotPink;">Cache-busting</span> is a technique used to invalidate the cached versions of files. This is typically done by appending a unique identifier (such as a hash) to the filenames of assets. When the content of the file changes, the hash changes, resulting in a new filename. Since the browser hasn't seen this new filename before, it fetches the latest version from the server. <span style="color: Cyan;">Again, this should be done only in production mode, not in development mode for better debugging purpose.</span>

```js
module.exports = {
  // ...
  output: {
    filename: '[name].[contenthash].js',
    path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'),
    clean: true, // Automatically clean the output directory before each build
  },
};
```

<span style="color: OrangeRed;">This should be done while generating CSS files as well!</span>

<u>**Why Changing the Filename Forces a Fetch**</u>

Browsers cache resources based on their URLs (which include the filename). When the filename changes:

- The URL of the resource changes.
- The browser doesn't find the new URL in its cache.
- The browser fetches the new resource from the server.

<br>

# Creating production server with express framework

For running our application in production mode, it is generally not advisable to use `webpack-dev-server` for following reasons:

- It is designed for development use. It provides features like hot module replacement (HMR), live reloading, and detailed debugging information, which are not optimized for performance.
- It lacks many of the security features and configurations that are standard in production servers. It might expose the application to various security vulnerabilities if used in a production environment.
- It does not support advanced server features like load balancing, request routing, and handling of SSL/TLS certificates, which are essential for production environments.

**INSTALLATION:**

```bash
npm install express
```

**CREATING THE SERVER:**

```js
// server/index.js

const express = require('express');
const path = require('path');
const app = express();

const PORT = process.env.PORT || 3000;

// Serve static files from the 'dist' directory
app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname, 'dist')));

// Handle all other routes with the index.html file
app.get('*', (req, res) => {
  res.sendFile(path.join(__dirname, 'dist', 'index.html'));
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Server is running on port ${PORT}`);
});
```

- `express`: This imports the Express module, which is a web application framework for Node.js.
- `app`: This contains an instance of Expres application.
- `app.use`: This is used to mount middleware functions.
- `express.static`: It is built-in middleware function in Express that serves static files from the `dist` directory.
- `app.get('*', (req, res) => {...})`: This sets up a route handler for all GET requests (`*` is a wildcard that matches all routes). This is useful for single-page applications (SPAs) where all routes should serve the same index.html file.
- `res.sendFile(path.join(__dirname, 'dist', 'index.html'))`: This sends the `index.html` file from the `dist` directory as the response to any GET request. This ensures that the client-side routing can take over after the initial page load.
- `app.listen(PORT, () => {...})`: This starts the server and makes it listen for incoming requests on the specified port (`PORT`).

<br>

# Compression

<b style="color:Khaki;">Gzip compression</b> is a widely-used method for reducing the size of files that are sent over the web, which can significantly improve load times and overall performance of web applications. When gzip compression is enabled in Webpack setup, it compresses JavaScript, CSS, HTML, and other text-based files before serving them to clients, leading to faster download times.

**WORKING:**

- **Compression:** Gzip compresses files by finding repetitive patterns within the files and replacing them with shorter representations. This can drastically reduce the file size.
- **Decompression:** Modern browsers can automatically decompress gzip files when they are received, making the process seamless for users.

To enable gzip compression in Webpack setup, we can use the <b style="color:Magenta;">compression-webpack-plugin</b>. This plugin will compress output files using gzip and create `.gz` versions of them.

**INSTALLATION:**

```bash
npm install compression-webpack-plugin --save-dev
```

**UPDATE WEBPACK CONFIG:**

```js
const path = require('path');
const CompressionPlugin = require('compression-webpack-plugin');

module.exports = {
  // ...
  plugins: [
    new CompressionPlugin({
      filename: '[path][base].gz', // Define the output filename format
      algorithm: 'gzip', // Specify the compression algorithm
      test: /\.(js|css|html|svg)$/, // (OPTIONAL) Define which files to compress
      threshold: 10240, // (OPTIONAL) Only compress files larger than this threshold (in bytes)
      minRatio: 0.8, // (OPTIONAL) Only compress files if the compression ratio is better than this
    }),
  ],
};
```

- <span style="color: Lime;">filename</span>: Specifies the naming convention for the compressed files. [path][base].gz will generate files like bundle.js.gz.
- <span style="color: Lime;">algorithm</span>: Sets the compression algorithm to use. In this case, it's gzip.
- <span style="color: Lime;">test</span>: Defines which files should be compressed using a regular expression. This example compresses JavaScript, CSS, HTML, and SVG files.
- <span style="color: Lime;">threshold</span>: Sets the minimum file size in bytes before compression is applied. Files smaller than this size will not be compressed.
- <span style="color: Lime;">minRatio</span>: Sets the minimum compression ratio that must be achieved for compression to be applied. Files that do not meet this ratio will not be compressed.

After this we will be able to see compressed versions of bundles available in `dist` folder along with original bundles. Now we need to configure our web server to serve the `.gz` files when a client supports gzip encoding. There is a special middleware for Express framework that allows us to do this - <b style="color:Violet;">compression</b>

**INSTALLATION:**

```bash
npm install --save-dev compression
```

**SERVER CONFIGURATION:**

```js
// ....
const compression = require('compression');
// .....
app.use(compression());
```

<b style="color:Gold;">Brotli compression</b> Brotli compression is a modern, general-purpose, lossless compression algorithm developed by Google. It provides better compression ratios than older algorithms like gzip, which means it can reduce file sizes even more effectively. Brotli is particularly effective for text-based files such as HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, making it an excellent choice for web applications.

Brotli works by using a combination of a modern variant of the LZ77 algorithm, Huffman coding, and second-order context modeling. These techniques allow Brotli to achieve high compression ratios while maintaining good decompression speed, which is crucial for web performance.

To enable Brotli compression in Webpack setup, we can use the same `compression-webpack-plugin` with Brotli support. This plugin will compress output files using Brotli and create `.br` versions of them.

**UPDATE WEBPACK CONFIG:**

```js
const path = require('path');
const CompressionPlugin = require('compression-webpack-plugin');

module.exports = {
  // ...
  plugins: [
    new CompressionPlugin({
      filename: '[path][base].br',
      algorithm: 'brotliCompress',
      test: /\.(js|css|html|svg)$/,
      compressionOptions: { level: 11 }, // Brotli compression level (0-11)
      threshold: 10240,
      minRatio: 0.8,
    }),
  ],
};
```

**CONFIGURATION OPTIONS (which are different from gzip one)**:

- <span style="color: HotPink;">compressionOptions</span>: Additional options for Brotli compression. The `level` option specifies the compression level, with `11` being the maximum. It signigies effort that the algorithm should use when compressing files. This setting controls the balance between compression time and the compression ratio (i.e., how small the compressed files will be).

**SERVER CONFIGURATION**

The compression middleware in Express automatically compresses responses on-the-fly using gzip (or Brotli if configured). However, there's another middleware that serves pre-compressed files (like `.gz` or `.br`) directly from the file system - <b style="color:Crimson;">express-static-gzip</b>. Install it like others in dev dependency.

```js
// ....

const expressStaticGzip = require('express-static-gzip');
// .....

// Serve Brotli-compressed files
app.use(
  '/',
  expressStaticGzip(path.join(__dirname, 'dist'), {
    // express.static replaced by expressStaticGzip
    enableBrotli: true,
    orderPreference: ['br', 'gz'],
  })
);

// .....
```

<span style="color: Cyan;">This middleware serves the Brotli-compressed files if the client supports it, falling back to gzip or uncompressed files otherwise.</span>

<br>

# <a href="https://webpack.js.org/guides/tree-shaking/">Tree Shaking</a>

Tree shaking is a term commonly used in the JavaScript ecosystem, particularly with module bundlers like Webpack, to describe the process of eliminating dead code (code that is never used or executed) from the final bundle. This optimization technique helps reduce the size of the output JavaScript file, leading to faster load times and improved performance.

Tree shaking leverages ES6 (ECMAScript 2015) module syntax, which allows static analysis of the import and export statements. Because ES6 imports and exports are static, it is possible for the bundler to determine which parts of the code are actually used and which can be safely removed.

**ENABLING TREE SHAKING**

- <b style="color:Orange;">ES6 Modules:</b> Code should use ES6 module syntax (`import` and `export`) instead of CommonJS (`require`/`exports`). Make sure third-party libraries being used support tree shaking. Libraries should provide ES6 module builds and correctly specify side effects. For example: `lodash` doesn't use ES6 import-export so we can use it's alternative `lodash-es`.
- <b style="color:Orange;">Production Mode:</b> Ensure Webpack is running in production mode (`mode: 'production'`).
- <b style="color:Orange;">Side Effects:</b> Ensure that the code and dependencies are marked correctly for side effects.

Here, `side effects` refer to any code that affects something outside of its own scope when the module is executed. This could include modifying global variables, performing I/O operations, or altering state in ways that aren't explicitly captured by the module's exports and imports. A module with no side effects is called `pure module`.

Importing the below module will cause the console log to be executed immediately, regardless of whether `greet` is used or not.

```js
// side-effects.js
console.log('This module has side effects');

export function greet() {
  console.log('Hello, world!');
}
```

Webpack needs to know which files or modules have side effects to perform tree shaking effectively. By default, Webpack assumes that any imported file might have side effects unless told otherwise. This is where the <span style="color: Lime;">sideEffects</span> field in `package.json` comes into play. Setting `"sideEffects": false` in `package.json` tells Webpack that none of the files in your project have side effects. Therefore, Webpack can safely remove any unused imports from these files during tree shaking. If only certain files have side effects, you can list them explicitly - `"sideEffects": ["./src/some-side-effect-file.js"]`. In this example, Webpack knows that `some-side-effect-file.js` has side effects, so it will include it in the bundle even if its exports are not used. This allows Webpack to treat the listed files as having side effects while safely tree shaking other files.

</div>
