<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

Building multiple page applications (MPAs) using webpack involves setting up multiple entry points, configuring the output, and handling shared resources. Code-splitting can be utilized to improve performance by dividing the code into smaller chunks that are loaded on demand.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Project Structure</h3>

```lua
├── src
│   ├── page1
│   │   ├── index.js
│   │   └── index.html
│   ├── page2
│   │   ├── index.js
│   │   └── index.html
├── dist
├── webpack.config.js
└── package.json
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Configure Webpack</h3>

- Create separate directories for each page, containing their respective JavaScript, CSS, and other assets.
- Create an `index.js` file as the entry point for each page.

```js
const path = require('path');
const HtmlWebpackPlugin = require('html-webpack-plugin');

module.exports = {
  mode: 'production',
  entry: { page1: './src/page1/index.js', page2: './src/page2/index.js' },
  output: { filename: '[name].[contenthash].bundle.js', path: path.resolve(__dirname, 'dist'), clean: true },
  plugins: [
    new HtmlWebpackPlugin({ filename: 'page1.html', template: './src/page1/index.html', chunks: ['page1'] }),
    new HtmlWebpackPlugin({ filename: 'page2.html', template: './src/page2/index.html', chunks: ['page2'] }),
  ],
  optimization: { splitChunks: { chunks: 'all' } },
};
```

- Multiple entry points are defined for MPA. Each entry point corresponds to a separate page (`page1` and `page2`). Webpack will create separate bundles for each entry point.
- In `output.filename` we are using `[name]` to uniquely identify the bundles and `[contenthash]` to create new bundles on code changes in order to get benefit of browser caching.
- `HtmlWebpackPlugin` generates HTML files for each entry point. It automatically includes the corresponding bundle (`page1.bundle.js` for `page1.html` and `page2.bundle.js` for `page2.html`).
  - `filename`: Specifies the name of the generated HTML file.
  - `template`: Points to the HTML template to use.
  - `chunks`: Specifies which chunks (bundles) should be included in the HTML file. It takes an array of chunk names. These names correspond to the keys defined in the `entry` configuration of webpack.
- `optimization.splitChunks.chunks` is set to `all` which means that both synchronous and asynchronous chunks will be split, allowing shared dependencies to be bundled separately and reused across different entry points, improving load times and efficiency. Multi-page applications that reuse a lot of code/modules (like `lodash`) between entry points can greatly benefit from these techniques, as the number of entry points increases.

</div>
