<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# <a href="https://webpack.js.org/configuration/optimization">Optimization</a>

Webpack runs optimizations depending on the chosen mode, still all optimizations are available for manual configuration and overrides.


## 1. Minification

Minification reduces the size of the JavaScript files by removing unnecessary characters, such as white spaces, new lines, and comments, and by shortening variable names.

- <span style="color: Lime;">minimize</span><span style="color: Yellow;">(boolean)</span><span style="color: HotPink;">[Default: true]</span>: Enable minification for the output.
- <span style="color: Lime;">minimizer</span><span style="color: Yellow;">(array)</span><span style="color: HotPink;">[Default: [TerserPlugin]]</span>: Customize which minifier to use. By default, Webpack uses `TerserPlugin` for JavaScript minification.

```js
module.exports = {
  optimization: {
    minimize: true,
    minimizer: [new CssMinimizer(), '...'], // '...' is shortcut to access the default configuration value of webpack
  },
};
```

## 2. Tree Shaking

Tree shaking is the process of removing unused code from the final bundle.

- <span style="color: Lime;">usedExports</span><span style="color: Yellow;">(boolean | string)</span><span style="color: HotPink;">[Default: true (in production mode)]</span>: Marks unused exports as dead code for removal. To opt-out from used exports analysis per runtime, set it to `'global'`. It is meant for production mode only but it can be manually turned on in development mode also.

<br>

## 3. splitChunks

<span style="color: Lime;">splitChunks</span><span style="color: Yellow;">(object)</span> is a feature in Webpack that helps with code splitting, which is the process of breaking up the code into smaller, more manageable pieces. This can improve load times and optimize the overall performance of web application by loading only the necessary code when needed. It's configuration allows us to customize how and when the code should be split into separate bundles.

The default configuration was chosen to fit web performance best practices, but the optimal strategy for a particular project might differ. If changing the configuration, one should measure the effect of changes to ensure there's a real benefit.

Configuration options in `splitChunks`: 

- <span style="color: Khaki;">chunks</span><span style="color: Coral;">(string: 'all', 'initial', 'async')</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 'all']</span>: Determines which chunks will be selected for optimization.
    - `'all'`: Split both synchronous and asynchronous chunks.
    - `'async'`: Split only asynchronous chunks (default).
    - `'initial'`: Split only synchronous chunks.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">minSize</span><span style="color: Coral;">(number)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 20000]</span>: The minimum size, in bytes, for a chunk to be generated. Prevents the creation of very small chunks.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">maxSize</span><span style="color: Coral;">(number)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 0]</span>: The maximum size, in bytes, for a chunk. If a chunk exceeds this size, it will be split into smaller chunks.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">minChunks</span><span style="color: Coral;">(number)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 1]</span>: The minimum number of times a module must be shared among chunks before it is split into a separate chunk. Ensures that modules used infrequently do not get split unnecessarily.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">maxAsyncRequests</span><span style="color: Coral;">(number)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 30]</span>: Max allowed parallel requests at entry point for asynchronous chunks. Limits the number of concurrent requests for better performance.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">maxInitialRequests</span><span style="color: Coral;">(number)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 30]</span>: The maximum number of parallel requests to load initial chunks. Limits the number of initial loading requests.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">enforceSizeThreshold</span><span style="color: Coral;">(number)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: 50000]</span>: Size threshold at which splitting is enforced and other restrictions (minRemainingSize, maxAsyncRequests, maxInitialRequests) are ignored.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">name</span><span style="color: Coral;">(boolean | string | function)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: true]</span>: The name of the split chunk. Providing `false` will keep the same name of the chunks so it doesn't change names unnecessarily. It is the recommended value for production builds.
- <span style="color: Khaki;">cacheGroups</span><span style="color: Coral;">(boolean | string | function)</span><span style="color: Violet;">[Default: true]</span>: Allows for more granular control over how code is split into chunks. It lets us define custom groups of modules that should be bundled together based on specific criteria. This is particularly useful for managing vendor libraries, common code, and other shared modules. This option is an object where each key defines a new cache group with its own set of rules for chunk splitting.
    - <span style="color: Cyan;">test</span><span style="color: Magenta;">(regex | string | function)</span>: Determines which modules should be included in the group.
    - <span style="color: Cyan;">name</span><span style="color: Magenta;">(string | function)</span>: Specifies the name of the resulting chunk.
    - <span style="color: Cyan;">priority</span><span style="color: Magenta;">(integer)</span>: Defines the priority of the cache group. Higher priority groups are processed first.
    - <span style="color: Cyan;">reuseExistingChunk</span><span style="color: Magenta;">(boolean)</span>: Reuses existing chunks instead of creating new ones if possible.

```js
const path = require('path');

module.exports = {
  // ....
  mode: 'production',
  optimization: {
    splitChunks: {
      chunks: 'all',
      cacheGroups: {
        vendors: { test: /[\\/]node_modules[\\/]/, name: 'vendors', chunks: 'all', priority: -10 },
        common: { name: 'common', minChunks: 2, priority: -20, reuseExistingChunk: true, enforce: true, },
      },
    },
  },
};

```

<br>

## 4. runtimeChunks

Right now, just remember that if multiple entry points are chosent, set `optimization.runtimeChunks: 'single'`.

<b style="color:Yellow;">**<----------------------------------MUST LEARN IT LATER!---------------------------------->**</b>


</div>