<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

<b>When you want a component to “remember” some information, but you don’t want that information to trigger new renders, you can use a `ref`. `Refs` also provide a way to access and interact with DOM elements or React components directly from within your code. They allow you to reference a particular element or component and perform actions such as reading its properties, calling its methods, or setting focus on

The <b style="color: Cyan;">useRef</b> hook is a built-in hook that helps us creating `refs`</b>

Reference:

```js
useRef(initialValue);
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Parameters:</h3>

`initialValue`: The value you want the ref object’s `current` property to be initially. It can be a value of any type. This argument is ignored after the initial render.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Returns:</h3>

`useRef` returns an object with a single property - <b style="color: Limegreen;">current</b>. Initially, value of this property is set to the `initialValue` you have passed. You can later set it to something else. If you pass the `ref` object to React as a `ref` attribute to a JSX node, React will set its `current` property as that DOM element. On the next renders, `useRef` will return the same object.

```js
import React, { useRef } from 'react';
const TestComponent = () => {
  const demoRef1 = useRef(0);
  const demoRef2 = useRef(null);
  console.log('demoRef1 = ', demoRef1); // demoRef1 =  {current: 0}
  return <div ref={demoRef2}></div>; // [demoRef2 can be used to access this div DOM node using buttonRef.current]
};
export default TestComponent;
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Bullet Points:</h3>

- You can mutate the `ref.current` property. Unlike state, it is mutable. However, if it holds an object that is used for rendering (for example, a piece of your state), then you shouldn’t mutate that object.
- You can store information between re-renders (unlike regular variables, which reset on every render).
- The information is local to each copy of your component (unlike the variables outside, which are shared).
- When you change the `ref.current` property, React does not re-render your component. React is not aware of when you change it because a ref is a plain JavaScript object (unlike state variables, which trigger a re-render).
- Do not write or read `ref.current` during rendering, except for initialization. This makes your component’s behavior unpredictable.
- When you change current property of `ref`, it will not change after re-renders.
- When to use refs:
  - Storing timeout IDs
  - Storing and manipulating DOM elements, which we cover on the next page
  - Storing other objects that aren’t necessary to calculate the JSX.

<br>

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px;">
In class components, you can create refs using <b style="color: HotPink;">React.createRef()</b>. This method does not take any argument and returns a ref object. Although is meant to use in class components, but it can be used in functional components as well.
</div>

<br>

# Manipulating the DOM with a ref

React automatically updates the DOM to match your render output, so your components won’t often need to manipulate it. However, sometimes you might need access to the DOM elements managed by React—for example, to focus a node, scroll to it, or measure its size and position. There is no built-in way to do those things in React, so you will need a ref to the DOM node.

First, declare a `ref` object with an initial value of `null` and then pass your `ref` object as the `ref` attribute to the JSX of the DOM node you want to manipulate:

```js
import { useRef } from 'react';

function MyComponent() {
  const inputRef = useRef(null);
  return <input ref={inputRef} />;
}

export default MyComponent;
```

After React creates the DOM node and puts it on the screen, React will set the `current` property of your `ref` object to that DOM node. You can then access this DOM node from your event handlers and use the built-in browser APIs defined on it.

```js
function handleClick() {
  inputRef.current.focus();
}
```

React will set the `current` property back to `null` when the node is removed from the screen.

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(103, 114, 230, 0.2);">

<h4 style="font-size: 22px;"><u>When React attaches the refs</u></h4>

In React, every update is split in two phases:

1. During <span style="color: Orange;">render</span>, React calls your components to figure out what should be on the screen.
2. During <span style="color: Orange;">commit</span>, React applies changes to the DOM.

In general, you don’t want to access refs during rendering. That goes for refs holding DOM nodes as well. During the first render, the DOM nodes have not yet been created, so `ref.current` will be `null`. And during the rendering of updates, the DOM nodes haven’t been updated yet. So it’s too early to read them.

React sets `ref.current` during the commit. Before updating the DOM, React sets the affected `ref.current` values to `null`. After updating the DOM, React immediately sets them to the corresponding DOM nodes.

Usually, you will access refs from event handlers. If you want to do something with a `ref`, but there is no particular event to do it in, you might need an Effect.

</div>

<br>

# flushSync

Consider code like this, which adds a new todo and scrolls the screen down to the last child of the list. Notice how, for some reason, it always scrolls to the todo that was just before the last added one:

```jsx
function handleAdd() {
  const newTodo = { id: nextId++, text: text };
  setTodos([...todos, newTodo]);
  listRef.current.lastChild.scrollIntoView({
    behavior: 'smooth',
    block: 'nearest',
  });
}
```

The reason for this behaviour is that in React, by default, React batches state updates and defers DOM rendering for performance optimization. While this is efficient in most cases, certain scenarios require immediate updates to ensure proper behavior.

To fix this issue, you can force React to update (“flush”) the DOM synchronously. To do this, import <span style="color: OrangeRed;">flushSync</span> from `react-dom` and wrap the state update into a `flushSync` call:

```jsx
flushSync(() => {
  setTodos([ ...todos, newTodo]);
});
listRef.current.lastChild.scrollIntoView();
```

This will instruct React to update the DOM synchronously right after the code wrapped in `flushSync` executes. As a result, the last todo will already be in the DOM by the time you try to scroll to it.

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(49, 239, 131, 0.2);">

React's default batching is optimized for performance. Frequent use of `flushSync` can negate these optimizations and lead to performance degradation. It is also generally not recommended for React's Concurrent Mode because it can interfere with React's scheduling and prioritization of updates.
</div>

<br>

# ref callback function

Instead of a `ref` object (like the one returned by `useRef`), you may pass a function to the `ref` attribute. A `ref callback function` offers more flexibility, particularly when you need dynamic control over the ref or cleanup logic.

```jsx
<div ref={(node) => console.log(node)} />
```

When the `<div>` DOM node is added to the screen, React will call your `ref` callback with the DOM node as the argument. When that `<div>` DOM node is removed, React will call your `ref` callback with `null`.

React will also call your `ref` callback whenever you pass a different `ref` callback. In the above example, `(node) => { ... }` is a different function on every render. When your component re-renders, the previous function will be called with `null` as the argument, and the next function will be called with the DOM node.

<u>**SINGLE PARAMETER RECEIVED:**</u>

<b style="color:orange;">node</b>: A DOM node or `null`. React will pass you the DOM node when the `ref` gets attached, and `null` when the `ref` gets detached. Unless you pass the same function reference for the `ref` callback on every render, the callback will get temporarily detached and re-attached during every re-render of the component.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Attach refs to list</h3>

Sometimes you might need a ref to each item in the list, and you don’t know how many you will have. Something like this wouldn’t work:

```jsx
<ul>
  {items.map((item) => {
    // Doesn't work!
    const ref = useRef(null);
    return <li ref={ref} />;
  })}
</ul>
```

This is because Hooks must only be called at the top-level of your component. You can’t call `useRef` in a loop, in a condition, or inside a `map()` call.

```js
const refsArr = useRef([]);
...
...
dataArr.map((data, index) => <div ref={refsArr.current[index] ?? (refsArr.current[index] = React.createRef())}>{data.value}</div>);
```

**OTHER METHOD:**

Another method is using `ref callbacks`. React will call your `ref callback` with the DOM node when it’s time to set the ref, and with `null` when it’s time to clear it. This lets you maintain your own array or a `Map`, and access any `ref` by its index or some kind of ID.

```jsx
const refsMap = useRef(new Map());
...
...
<ul>
  {dataList.map((data) => (
    <li
      ref={(node) => {
        if (node) refsMap.set(data.id, node);
        else refsMap.delete(data.id);
      }}
    >
      {data.value}
    </li>
  ))}
</ul>;
...
```

<br>

# Accessing another component’s DOM nodes

**You can pass refs from parent component to child components just like any other prop.**

```jsx
import { useRef } from 'react';

function MyInput({ ref }) {
  return <input ref={ref} />;
}

function MyForm() {
  const inputRef = useRef(null);
  return <MyInput ref={inputRef} />;
}
```

In the above example, a `ref` is created in the parent component, `MyForm`, and is passed to the child component, `MyInput`. MyInput then passes the `ref` to `<input>`. Because `<input>` is a built-in component React sets the .current property of the `ref` to the `<input>` DOM element.

The `inputRef` created in `MyForm` now points to the `<input>` DOM element returned by `MyInput`. A click handler created in `MyForm` can access `inputRef` and call `focus()` to set the focus on `<input>`.

<br>

# Exposing a subset of the API with an imperative handle

In the above example, the ref passed to `MyInput` is passed on to the original DOM input element. This lets the parent component call `focus()` on it. However, this also lets the parent component do something else—for example, change its CSS styles. In uncommon cases, you may want to restrict the exposed functionality. You can do that with <span style="color: Coral;">useImperativeHandle</span> hook.

```js
import { useRef, useImperativeHandle } from 'react';

function MyInput({ ref }) {
  const realInputRef = useRef(null);
  useImperativeHandle(ref, () => ({
    // Only expose focus and nothing else
    focus() {
      realInputRef.current.focus();
    },
  }));
  return <input ref={realInputRef} />;
}
```

Here, `realInputRef` inside `MyInput` holds the actual input DOM node. However, `useImperativeHandle` instructs React to provide your own special object as the value of a ref to the parent component. So `inputRef.current` inside the `Form` component will only have the `focus` method. In this case, the ref “handle” is not the DOM node, but the custom object you create inside `useImperativeHandle` call.

<br>

# forwardRef

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(199, 39, 28, 0.2);">

❌ <b style="color:red;">DEPRECATED</b> ❌

In React 19, `forwardRef` is no longer necessary. Pass `ref` as a prop instead. `forwardRef` will deprecated in a future release.

</div>

<br>

In React, the `forwardRef` is a `higher-order component` that allows you to pass a `ref` from a parent component to a child component that may be a functional component. It's particularly useful when you want to maintain direct access to a DOM element or a React component instance created by a child component, even when that child component is a functional component or a component created using the React.memo optimization.

The primary use case for `forwardRef` is to enable parent components to access and manipulate child components in cases where the child component is implemented using functional components.

```js
// Parent Component

import React, { useRef } from 'react';
import TestComponentChild from './TestComponentChild';

const TestComponent = () => {
  const childRef = useRef(null);
  const addFocusOnInput = () => {
    childRef.current.focus();
  };
  return (
    <>
      <TestComponentChild ref={childRef} />
      <button onClick={addFocusOnInput}>Add Focus</button>
    </>
  );
};

export default TestComponent;
```

```js
// Child Component

import React, { forwardRef } from 'react';

const TestComponentChild = (props, ref) => {
  return <input ref={ref} />;
};

export default forwardRef(TestComponentChild);
```

<br>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Why not use refs directly as props</h3>

<b>1-></b> If we assign to `ref` prop an actual ref, React will throw a warning `Warning: Function components cannot be given refs`. This won't work at all because you'll see that no prop called `ref` will be received in Child component.

```js
// Parent Component

import React, { useRef } from 'react';
import TestComponentChild from './TestComponentChild';

const TestComponent = () => {
  const childRef = useRef(null);
  return <TestComponentChild ref={childRef} />;
};

export default TestComponent;
```

```js
// Child Component

import React from 'react';

const TestComponentChild = ({ ref }) => {
  // ref is undefined here
  return <input ref={ref} />;
};

export default TestComponentChild;
```

<div style="background: DarkRed;  padding: 0.3rem 0.8rem;">But if we don't pass `ref` prop to child component and instead of that we pass some custom prop (say childRef), this will work perfectly without any warnings. However, we shouldn't do that too because of next points.
</div>
<br>

<b>2-></b>Props are immutable in React. Passing the ref using a prop violates the props immutability because the ref eventually is assigned (aka mutated) with the DOM element.
<br>

<b>3-></b>Using ref attribute (instead of a custom prop like childRef) is better because it keeps the ref API consistent between class-based, function-based, and HTML tags.
<br>

<b>4-></b>When passing a `ref` as a prop directly, if the parent component re-renders for any reason, the functional child component might also re-render. This can lead to unnecessary re-renders of the child component

</div>

<!-- <div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;"> -->
<!-- <div style="background: DarkRed;padding: 0.3rem 0.8rem;"> [HIGHLIGHT] -->
<!-- <h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;"> [SUBHEADING] -->
<!-- <b style="color: Chartreuse;"> [NOTE] -->
<!-- <b style="color:red;"> [NOTE-2] -->
<!-- <span style="color: Cyan;"> [IMP] -></span> -->
<!-- <b style="color: Salmon;"> [POINT] -->
<!-- <div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px;"> [BORDER] -->
