<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

**Some components need to synchronize with external systems. For example, you might want to control a non-React component based on the React state, set up a server connection, or send an analytics log when a component appears on the screen. Effects let you run some code after rendering so that you can synchronize your component with some system outside of React.**

There are two types of logic inside React components:

- **Rendering code:** Lives at the top level of your component. This is where you take the props and state, transform them, and return the JSX you want to see on the screen. Rendering code must be <span style="color: OrangeRed;">pure</span>. Like a math formula, it should only calculate the result, but not do anything else.

- **Event handlers:** They are nested functions inside your components that do things rather than just calculate them. An event handler might update an input field, submit an HTTP POST request to buy a product, or navigate the user to another screen. Event handlers contain “side effects” caused by a specific user action (for example, a button click or typing).

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px;background-color: rgba(103, 114, 230, 0.2);">

Side effects in React functional components refer to any actions or behaviors that are not directly related to rendering the user interface but can still affect the component or the application as a whole. These side effects can include things like data fetching, DOM manipulation, subscriptions, and interactions with external APIs or services. Basically when we talk about side effects in the context of React, we are referring to anything that is outside the scope of React.

</div>

<br>

Sometimes above both logics aren’t enough. Consider a `ChatRoom` component that must connect to the chat server whenever it’s visible on the screen. Connecting to a server is not a pure calculation (it’s a side effect) so it can’t happen during rendering. However, there is no single particular event like a click that causes `ChatRoom` to be displayed.

<b style="color:Salmon;">Effects</b> let you specify side effects that are caused by rendering itself, rather than by a particular event. Sending a message in the chat is an event because it is directly caused by the user clicking a specific button. However, setting up a server connection is an Effect because it should happen no matter which interaction caused the component to appear. <span style="color: Cyan;">Effects run at the end of a commit after the screen paints (generally) [**READ ABOUT IT**].</span> This is a good time to synchronize the React components with some external system (like network or a third-party library).

<br>

# Steps to write an effect

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Step 1: Declare an effect</h3>

<span style="color: HotPink;">By default, your Effect will run after every commit.</span> To declare an Effect in your component, import the <b style="color:Coral;">useEffect</b> Hook from React:

```js
import { useEffect } from 'react';
```

Then, call it at the top level of your component and put some code inside your Effect:

```jsx
function MyComponent() {
  useEffect(() => {
    // Code here will run after *every* render
  });
  return <div />;
}
```

Every time your component renders, React will update the screen and then run the code inside `useEffect`. In other words, `useEffect` **“delays”** a piece of code from running until that render is reflected on the screen.

**EXAMPLE:** Consider a `<VideoPlayer>` React component. It would be nice to control whether it’s playing or paused by passing an `isPlaying` prop to it. However, the browser `<video>` tag does not have an `isPlaying` prop. The only way to control it is to manually call the `play()` and `pause()` methods on the DOM element. You need to synchronize the value of isPlaying prop, which tells whether the video should currently be playing, with calls like `play()` and `pause()`. We’ll need to first get a ref to the `<video>` DOM node. You might be tempted to try to call `play()` or `pause()` during rendering, but that isn’t correct.

```js
function VideoPlayer({ src, isPlaying = false }) {
  const ref = useRef(null);

  if (isPlaying) ref.current.play(); // ❌ Calling these while rendering isn't allowed.
  else ref.current.pause(); // ❌ Also, this crashes. Error - Cannot read properties of null (reading 'pause')

  return <video ref={ref} src={src} loop playsInline />;
}
```

The reasons this is incorrect:

- It tries to do something with the DOM node during rendering. In React, <span style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">rendering should be a pure calculation</span> of JSX and should not contain side effects like modifying the DOM.
- Moreover, when `VideoPlayer` is called for the first time, its DOM does not exist yet! There isn’t a DOM node yet to call `play()` or `pause()` on, because React doesn’t know what DOM to create until you return the JSX.

The solution here is to <u>**wrap the side effect with `useEffect` to move it out of the rendering calculation**</u>:

```jsx
function VideoPlayer({ src, isPlaying }) {
  const ref = useRef(null);

  useEffect(() => {
    if (isPlaying) {
      ref.current.play();
    } else {
      ref.current.pause();
    }
  });

  return <video ref={ref} src={src} loop playsInline />;
}
```

By wrapping the DOM update in an Effect, you let React update the screen first. Then your Effect runs. When your `VideoPlayer` component renders (either the first time or if it re-renders), a few things will happen. First, React will update the screen, ensuring the `<video>` tag is in the DOM with the right props. Then React will run your Effect. Finally, your Effect will call `play()` or `pause()` depending on the value of isPlaying.

In this example, the “external system” you synchronized to React state was the browser media API. You can use a similar approach to wrap legacy non-React code (like jQuery plugins) into declarative React components.

<div style="border: 1px solid red; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(7, 244, 58, 0.37);">

By default, Effects run after every render. This is why code like this will produce an infinite loop:

```js
const [count, setCount] = useState(0);
useEffect(() => {
  setCount(count + 1);
});
```

Effects run as a result of rendering. Setting state triggers rendering. Setting state immediately in an Effect is like plugging a power outlet into itself. The Effect runs, it sets the state, which causes a re-render, which causes the Effect to run, it sets the state again, this causes another re-render, and so on.

Effects should usually synchronize your components with an external system. If there’s no external system and you only want to adjust some state based on other state, you might not need an Effect.

</div>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Step 2: Specify the Effect dependencies</h3>

By default, Effects run after every render. Often, this is not what you want. Sometimes, it’s slow. Synchronizing with an external system is not always instant, so you might want to skip doing it unless it’s necessary. For example, you don’t want to reconnect to the chat server on every keystroke.

<span style="color: Yellow;">You can tell React to skip unnecessarily re-running the Effect by specifying an array of dependencies as the second argument to the `useEffect` call.</span>

```js
useEffect(() => {
  //...
}, [dependency1, dependecy2, ....])
```

In the previous `<VideoPlayer>` component example, you should see an ESLint error saying `React Hook useEffect has a missing dependency: 'isPlaying'`. The problem is that the code inside of your Effect depends on the `isPlaying` prop to decide what to do, but this dependency was not explicitly declared. To fix this issue, add `isPlaying` to the dependency array:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  // It's used here...
  if (isPlaying) {
    // ...
  } else {
    // ...
  }
}, [isPlaying]); // ...so it must be declared here!
```

Now all dependencies are declared, so there is no error. Specifying `[isPlaying]` as the dependency array tells React that it should skip re-running your Effect if isPlaying is the same as it was during the previous render.

<b style="color:red;">NOTE:</b> This Effect uses both `ref` and `isPlaying`, but only `isPlaying` is declared as a dependency. This is because the object has a stable identity: React guarantees you’ll always get the same object from the same `useRef` call on every render. It never changes, so it will never by itself cause the Effect to re-run. Therefore, it does not matter whether you include it or not. Including it is fine too

The dependency array can contain multiple dependencies. React will only skip re-running the Effect if all of the dependencies you specify have exactly the same values as they had during the previous render. React compares the dependency values using the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object/is">Object.is</a> comparison.

Notice that you can’t “choose” your dependencies. You will get a lint error if the dependencies you specified don’t match what React expects based on the code inside your Effect. This helps catch many bugs in your code. If you don’t want some code to re-run, edit the Effect code itself to not “need” that dependency.

The behaviors without the dependency array and with an empty [] dependency array are different:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  // This runs after every render
});

useEffect(() => {
  // This runs only on mount (when the component appears)
}, []);

useEffect(() => {
  // This runs on mount *and also* if either a or b have changed since the last render
}, [a, b]);
```

<br>

<div style="border: 2px solid HotPink; padding: 10px; background-color: DarkBlue">
<b style="color:Orange;">Will useEffect run if ref.current is added in dependency array and its value changes? </b>

<br>

<b>Let's recall the purpose of a dependency array: It's there so React can do something when there are changes in the values provided each time the component renders. And that's the answer right there! React can't know that the value changed if a change doesn't trigger a render!

So the answer is NO!</b>

<b style="color: Chartreuse;">Hence, refs should never be put in dependency array!</b>

</div>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Step 3: Add cleanup if needed </h3>

Consider a different example. You’re writing a `ChatRoom` component that needs to connect to the chat server when it appears. You are given a `createConnection()` API that returns an object with `connect()` and `disconnect()` methods.

```js
useEffect(() => {
  const connection = createConnection();
  connection.connect();
}, []);
```

Imagine the `ChatRoom` component is a part of a larger app with many different screens. The user starts their journey on the `ChatRoom` page. The component mounts and calls `connection.connect()`. Then imagine the user navigates to another screen—for example, to the `Settings` page. The `ChatRoom` component unmounts. Finally, the user clicks Back and `ChatRoom` mounts again. This would set up a second connection—but the first connection was never destroyed! As the user navigates across the app, the connections would keep piling up.

To fix the issue, return a <b style="color:Coral;">cleanup function</b> from your Effect:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  const connection = createConnection();
  connection.connect();
  return () => connection.disconnect();
}, []);
```

<span style="color: SpringGreen;">React will call your cleanup function each time before the Effect runs again, and one final time when the component unmounts (gets removed).</span> In **development mode**, React intentionally remounts your components in development to find bugs like in the last example. You can turn off <a href="https://react.dev/reference/react/StrictMode">Strict Mode</a> to opt out of the development behavior, it is recommended to keep it on.

<div style="border: 1px solid red; padding: 10px; background-color: rgba(164, 26, 192, 0.32);">

**Remember that the cleanup which runs is always of the returned function of function instance that was passed in `useEffect` in previous render!** Check the polyfill of `useEffect` to understand best and check the order below (different colors indicate different function instances):

**--Mount(Initial Render)--> <span style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">setup1</span> --Re-render--> <span style="color: DeepSkyBlue;">cleanup1</span> --> <span style="color: Yellow;">setup2</span> --Re-render--> <span style="color: Yellow;">cleanup2</span> --> <span style="color: Orange;">setup3</span> --Unmount--> <span style="color: Orange;">cleanup3</span>**

</div>

<br>

# When to use Effects

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">1. Subscribing to events</h3>

If your Effect subscribes to something, the cleanup function should unsubscribe:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  function handleScroll(e) {
    console.log(window.scrollX, window.scrollY);
  }
  window.addEventListener('scroll', handleScroll);
  return () => window.removeEventListener('scroll', handleScroll);
}, []);
```

In development, your Effect will call `addEventListener()`, then immediately `removeEventListener()`, and then `addEventListener()` again with the same handler. So there would be only one active subscription at a time. This has the same user-visible behavior as calling `addEventListener()` once, as in production.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">2. Fetching data</h3>

If your Effect fetches something, the cleanup function should either abort the fetch or ignore its result:

```js
useEffect(() => {
  let ignore = false;

  (async () => {
    const json = await fetchTodos(userId);
    if (!ignore) setTodos(json);
  })();

  return () => {
    ignore = true;
  };
}, [userId]);
```

You can’t “undo” a network request that already happened, but your cleanup function should ensure that the fetch that’s not relevant anymore does not keep affecting your application. If the userId changes from `'Alice'` to `'Bob'`, cleanup ensures that the `'Alice'` response is ignored even if it arrives after `'Bob'`.

Writing `fetch` calls inside Effects is a popular way to fetch data, especially in fully client-side apps. This is, however, a very manual approach and it has significant downsides:

- **Effects don’t run on the server.** This means that the initial server-rendered HTML will only include a loading state with no data. The client computer will have to download all JavaScript and render your app only to discover that now it needs to load the data. This is not very efficient.
- **Fetching directly in Effects makes it easy to create “network waterfalls”.** You render the parent component, it fetches some data, renders the child components, and then they start fetching their data. If the network is not very fast, this is significantly slower than fetching all data in parallel.
- **Fetching directly in Effects usually means you don’t preload or cache data.** For example, if the component unmounts and then mounts again, it would have to fetch the data again.
- **It’s not very ergonomic.** There’s quite a bit of boilerplate code involved when writing fetch calls in a way that doesn’t suffer from bugs like race conditions.

Consider using or building a client-side cache. Popular open source solutions include `React Query`, `useSWR`, and `React Router 6.4+`. You can build your own solution too, in which case you would use Effects under the hood, but add logic for deduplicating requests, caching responses, and avoiding network waterfalls (by preloading data or hoisting data requirements to routes).

<br>

# When not to use Effects

**If there is no external system involved (for example, if you want to update a component’s state when some props or state change), you shouldn’t need an Effect. Removing unnecessary Effects will make your code easier to follow, faster to run, and less error-prone.**

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">1. Initializing the application</h3>

Some logic should only run once when the application starts. You can put it outside your components:

```js
if (typeof window !== 'undefined') { // Check if we're running in the browser.
  checkAuthToken();
  loadDataFromLocalStorage();
}

function App() {
  // ...
}
```

This guarantees that such logic only runs once after the browser loads the page.

</div>

