<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

<b>React comes with several built-in Hooks like `useState`, `useContext`, `useEffect`, etc. Sometimes, you’ll wish that there was a Hook for some more specific purpose: for example, to fetch data, to keep track of whether the user is online, or to connect to a chat room. You might not find these Hooks in React, but you can create your own Hooks for your application’s needs.</b>

Custom Hooks let you share stateful logic but not state itself. Each call to a Hook is completely independent from every other call to the same Hook.

Consider below code:

```js
// useCounter.js => CUSTOM HOOK
import { useState } from "react";
const useCounter = (initialValue) => {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(initialValue);
  const increment = () => {
    setCount(count + 1);
  };
  const decrement = () => {
    setCount(count - 1);
  };
  return { count, increment, decrement };
};
export default useCounter;
```

```js
// TestComponent.js
import useCounter from "./useCounter";
const TestComponent = () => {
  const { count, increment, decrement } = useCounter(0);
  return (
    <div>
      <p>Count: {count}</p>
      <button onClick={increment}>Increment</button>
      <button onClick={decrement}>Decrement</button>
    </div>
  )
};
export default TestComponent;
```

Hook names must start with `use` followed by a capital letter, like `useState` (built-in). This convention guarantees that you can always look at a component and know where its state, Effects, and other React features might “hide”. In this example, the `useCounter` custom hook encapsulates the state management logic for counting, and the `CounterComponent` uses this hook to manage and display the count state. Custom hooks empower you to create reusable pieces of logic that can significantly enhance the maintainability and scalability of your React applications.

The code inside your custom Hooks will re-run during every re-render of your component. This is why, like components, <span style="color: HotPink;">custom Hooks need to be pure</span>. Think of custom Hooks’ code as part of your component’s body! Because custom Hooks re-render together with your component, they always receive the latest props and state. 

<br>

# When to use custom Hooks

You don’t need to extract a custom Hook for every little duplicated bit of code. Some duplication is fine. However, whenever you write an Effect, consider whether it would be clearer to also wrap it in a custom Hook. You shouldn’t need Effects very often, so if you’re writing one, it means that you need to “step outside React” to synchronize with some external system or to do something that React doesn’t have a built-in API for. Wrapping it into a custom Hook lets you precisely communicate your intent and how the data flows through it.



</div>

<!-- <div style="background: DarkRed;  padding: 0.3rem 0.8rem;"> => HIGHLIGHT -->
<!-- <h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;"> => SUBHEADING -->
<!-- <b style="color: Chartreuse;"> => IMPORTANT-1 -->
<!--  => IMPORTANT-2 -->
<!-- <mark style="padding: 0.3rem 0.8rem;"> => IMPORTANT-3 -->
<!-- <b> => IMPORTANT-5 -->
<!-- <b style="color:red;"> => NOTE -->
<!-- <br><span style="color: Cyan;">-></span> -->
