<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Conditional Rendering

Your components will often need to display different things depending on different conditions. In React, you can conditionally render JSX using JavaScript syntax like `if` statements, `&&`, and `?` `:` operators. Example code:

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">if-else method</h3>

```js
export default function CompilerMsg() {
  const hasErrorOccured = true;
  if (hasErrorOccured) return <div>An Error Has Occured!</div>;
  return <div>Program Compiled Succesfully!</div>;
}
```

<span style="color: Orange;">In some situations, you won’t want to render anything at all. In that case, you can return `null`.</span>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Conditional (Ternary) Operator</h3>

We can use this conditional rendering inside JSX as well. This can prevent code duplication.

```js
export default function PetName() {
  const isDog = true;
  <div>
    <h1>Pet Name:</h1>
    {isDog ? <div>Animal is Dog</div> : <div>Animal is not Dog</div>}
  </div>;
}
```

This style works well for simple conditions, but use it in moderation. If your components get messy with too much nested conditional markup, consider extracting child components to clean things up. In React, markup is a part of your code, so you can use tools like variables and functions to tidy up complex expressions.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Logical AND operator (&&)</h3>

Inside React components, it often comes up when you want to render some JSX when the condition is true, or render nothing otherwise. With `&&`, you could conditionally render the component only if required condition is fulfilled - `{cond && <A />}`, or render nothing otherwise. A JavaScript && expression returns the value of its right side (in our case, the checkmark) if the left side (our condition) is `true`. But if the condition is `false`, the whole expression becomes `false`. React considers `false` as a “hole” in the JSX tree, just like `null` or `undefined`, and doesn’t render anything in its place.

<span style="color:red;">Don’t put numbers on the left side of `&&`. Make the left side always a boolean.</span> To test the condition, JavaScript converts the left side to a boolean automatically. However, if the left side is `0`, then the whole expression gets that value (`0`), and React will happily render `0` rather than nothing.

<br>

# Rendering Lists

You will often want to display multiple similar components from a collection of data. In React, when you have an array of JSX elements, it effectively becomes a list of JSX items due to the way React processes and renders them. You can use the JavaScript array methods like `map()`, `filter()`, etc. to manipulate an array of data. Example -

```js
export default function TestComponent() {
  const dataArr = [1, 2, 3, 4];
  const numbersList = dataArr.map((data) => <div>{data}</div>);
  return <div>{numbersList}</div>;
}
```

<b style="color: Orange;">NOTE:</b> Above code will result in a warning in console - <span style="color: rgb(251, 126, 117);">Warning: Each child in a list should have a unique “key” prop.</span> You need to give each array item a `key` — a string or a number that uniquely identifies it among other items in that array. JSX elements directly inside a `map()` call always need keys! Modify above code like this:

```js
...
const numbersList = dataArr.map((data) => <div key={data}>{data}</div>);
...
```

Keys tell React which array item each component corresponds to, so that it can match them up later. This becomes important if your array items can move (e.g. due to sorting), get inserted, or get deleted. A well-chosen key helps React infer what exactly has happened, and make the correct updates to the DOM tree.

<b style="color:Crimson;">Every time a component's key changes, React will create a new component instance rather than updating the current one</b>, so for performance's sake using `Math.random()` or dates will be sub-optimal to say the least because this will cause keys to never match up between renders, leading to all your components and DOM being recreated every time. Not only is this slow, but it will also lose any user input inside the list items. 

Index from `map()` can be used as key if we are sure that we won't re-order/delete the elements. But there will be issues if reordering or deletion happens. The reason is similar to above. If an item is deleted, rest of the elements will have their `key` attribute changed and re-creation of all items will take place.

<b style="color:OrangeRed;">Note</b>: Your components won’t receive `key` as a prop. It’s only used as a hint by React itself.

<u>**WHERE TO GET YOUR KEY**</u>

- **Data from a database:** If your data is coming from a database, you can use the database keys/IDs, which are unique by nature.
- **Locally generated data:** If your data is generated and persisted locally (e.g. notes in a note-taking app), use an incrementing counter, `crypto.randomUUID()` or a package like `uuid` when creating items.
- **Map ids:** If you have an array of list items which might have insertions and deletions, you can create a new array which has ids attached to all items. Those ids can be generated from `Date.now()`. Make sure to generate that new array with `useMemo` so that you don't have new ids mapped to items on every render.

</div>