<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

<b>React lets you add event handlers to your JSX. Event handlers are your own functions that will be triggered in response to interactions like clicking, hovering, focusing form inputs, and so on.</b>

To add an event handler, you will first define a function and then pass it as a prop to the <span style="color: Orange;">appropriate</span> JSX tag. 

```js
export default function Button() {
  const handleClick = () => {
    alert("You clicked me!");
  };

  // Event declaration in plain HTML :- <button onclick="handleClick()">Click Me!</button>

  // Event declaration in React
  return <button onClick={handleClick}>Click Me!</button>;
}
```

You defined the `handleClick` function and then passed it as a prop to `<button>`. `handleClick` is an event handler. Event handler functions:

- Are usually defined inside your components.
- Have names that start with handle, followed by the name of the event.

By convention, it is common to name event handlers as `handle` followed by the event name. You’ll often see `onClick={handleClick}`, `onMouseEnter={handleMouseEnter}`, and so on.

Alternatively, you can define an event handler inline in the JSX:

```jsx
<button onClick={() => { alert('You clicked me!'); }}>
```

<br>

# Event object

Event handlers receive an event object as their only argument. By convention, it’s usually called `e`, which stands for “event”. You can use this object to read information about the event like event object received in event handler attached to `onChange` for input field `<input />` will tell us the entered text. Best way is to console the event object and see how can we get the data required.

These events are called <b style="color:red;">Synthetic Events</b>. They are custom event objects created by React that wrap around the native browser events. They standardize the behavior of events across different browsers and provide a unified API for event handling in React applications. Synthetic events expose the same interface as native browser events, so developers can use familiar properties and methods (e.g., event delegation, `stopPropagation()`, `preventDefault()`, `target`, `currentTarget`, etc.). For performance reasons, React implements event pooling. This means that the synthetic event objects are reused across different events. After the event callback has been invoked, all properties of the synthetic event are nullified. This helps in reducing memory overhead.

```js
const InputFieldTest = () => {
  const handleTextEntered = (e) => {
    console.log(e.target.value);
  };
  return <input onChange={handleTextEntered} />;
};
```

<br>

# Passing event handlers as props

Often you’ll want the parent component to specify a child’s event handler. Consider buttons: depending on where you’re using a Button component, you might want to execute a different function—perhaps one plays a movie and another uploads an image.

```js
// Button.js
export default function Button({ onClick }) {
  return <button onClick={onClick}>Click Me!</button>;
}
```

```js
// UploadImage.js
export default function UploadImage() {
  const handleUploadImage = () => {
    alert("Image Upload Process Initiated");
    // Image Upload Logic
  };
  return <Button onClick={handleUploadImage} />;
}
```

```js
// PlayMusic.js
export default function PlayMusic() {
  const handlePlayMusic = () => {
    alert("Music Start Process Initiated");
    // Play Music Upload Logic
  };
  return <Button onClick={handlePlayMusic} />;
}
```

<b style="color:red;">NOTE</b>: Built-in components like `<button>` and `<div>` only support browser event names like `onClick`. However, when you’re building your own components, you can name their event handler props any way that you like. Like in above example, instead of passing the prop named `onClick` in `Button` component, we could have passed `onSmash` prop. By convention, event handler props should start with `on`, followed by a capital letter.

<b>Can event handlers have side effects?</b>

<b>Absolutely! Event handlers are the best place for side effects.</b> 

Unlike rendering functions, event handlers don’t need to be pure, so it’s a great place to change something—for example, change an input’s value in response to typing, or change a list in response to a button press. However, in order to change some information, you first need some way to store it. In React, this is done by using state, a component’s memory. You will learn all about it on the next page.

</div>