<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# State: A Component's Memory

<b>Components often need to change what’s on the screen as a result of an interaction. Typing into the form should update the input field, clicking “next” on an image carousel should change which image is displayed, clicking “buy” should put a product in the shopping cart. Components need to “remember” things: the current input value, the current image, the shopping cart. In React, this kind of component-specific memory is called state.</b>

Check out the below component:

```jsx
export default function App() {
  var i = 0;
  const handleClick = async () => {
    i++;
  };
  return (
    <div className="App">
      <button onClick={handleClick}>Clicked {i} times</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

Clicking on the button will not change button's text. The `handleClick` event handler is updating a local variable, `i`. But two things prevent that change from being visible:

1. **Local variables don’t persist between renders.** When React renders this component a second time, it renders it from scratch—it doesn’t consider any changes to the local variables.
2. **Changes to local variables won’t trigger renders.** React doesn’t realize it needs to render the component again with the new data.

To update a component with new data, two things need to happen:

1. **Retain the data between renders.**
2. **Trigger React to render the component with new data (re-rendering).**

The <span style="color: OrangeRed;">useState</span> hook provides these 2 things. We have to import it from `React` library at the top!

**SYNTAX:**

```js
const [data, setData] = useState(inititalState);
```

**PARAMETERS:**

`initalState` is the value you want the state to be initially. It can be a value of any type, but there is a special behavior for functions. <span style="color: SpringGreen;">If you pass a function as initial state, it will be treated as an initializer function that returns the value of initial state and will be called only once at initial render and will be ignored after that.</span> It should be pure, should take no arguments, and should return a value of any type. That's why one should be careful while trying to set any function variable as initial state - use curry function in that case!

**RETURNS:**

Every time your component renders, `useState` gives you an array containing two values:

1. The `state variable` with the current value of state. It retains the data between renders.
2. The `state setter function` which can update the state variable and trigger React to render the component again.

When you call `useState`, you are telling React that you want this component to remember something. The convention is to name this pair like `const [something, setSomething]`. You could name it anything you like, but conventions make things easier to understand across projects. 

Consider the given below code:

```js
import React, { useState } from 'react';
const TestComponent = () => {
  const [index, setIndex] = useState(0);
  const buttonClicked = () => {
    setIndex(index + 1);
  };
  return <button onClick={buttonClicked}>Increase index: {index}</button>;
};
export default TestComponent;
```

1. <b>Your component renders the first time</b>. Because you passed `0` to `useState` as the initial value for `index`, it will return `[0, setIndex]`. React remembers `0` is the latest state value.
2. <b>You update the state.</b> When a user clicks the button, it calls `setIndex(index + 1)`. `index` is `0`, so it’s `setIndex(1)`. This tells React to remember index is `1` now and triggers another render.
3. <b>Your component’s second render.</b> React still sees `useState(0)`, but because React remembers that you set `index` to `1`, it returns `[1, setIndex]` instead.
4. And so on!

<br>

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgb(43, 52, 145, 0.6);">

State is local to a component instance on the screen. In other words, if you render the same component twice, each copy will have completely isolated state! Changing one of them will not affect the other. This is what makes state different from regular variables that you might declare at the top of your module. State is not tied to a particular function call or a place in the code, but it’s “local” to the specific place on the screen. Unlike props, state is fully private to the component declaring it. The parent component can’t change it. This lets you add state to any component or remove it without impacting the rest of the components.

</div>

<br>

<div style="border: 1px solid yellow; padding: 10px; background-color: rgb(50, 100, 70, 0.6);">

In React, `useState`, as well as any other function starting with `“use”`, is called a <span style="color: Orange;">Hook</span>. Hooks are special functions that are only available while React is rendering. They let you “hook into” different React features. State is just one of those features, but you will meet the other Hooks later. Rules of hooks:

- Hooks can only be called at the top level of your components or your own custom hooks.
- You can’t call Hooks inside conditions, loops, or other nested functions.

</div>

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Updating Objects in State</h3>

<b>State can hold any kind of JavaScript value, including objects. But you shouldn’t change objects that you hold in the React state directly. Instead, when you want to update an object, you need to create a new one (or make a copy of an existing one), and then set the state to use that copy. <span style="color: Pink;">This is because objects are passed as reference in state and that reference has to change in order to trigger re-render.</span></b>

So far you’ve been working with numbers, strings, and booleans. These kinds of JavaScript values are “immutable”, meaning unchangeable or “read-only”. You can trigger a re-render to replace a value:

```js
...
const [x, setX] = useState(0);
...
...
setX(5);
```

The `x` state changed from `0` to `5`, but the number `0` itself did not change. It’s not possible to make any changes to the built-in primitive values like numbers, strings, and booleans in JavaScript.

Now consider an object in state. Technically, it is possible to change the contents of the object itself. This is called a mutation:

```js
...
const [position, setPosition] = useState({ x: 0, y: 0 });
...
...
position.x = 5;
```

However, although objects in React state are technically mutable, you should treat them as if they were immutable—like numbers, booleans, and strings. Instead of mutating them, you should always replace them because mutating them won't trigger re-render as via this way, React won't have any idea that object has changed. One should treat any JavaScript object that he puts into state as read-only. To actually trigger a re-render in this case, create a new object and pass it to the state setting function:

```js
setPosition({ x: 5, y: 5 });
```

In the previous example, the position object is always created fresh from the current cursor position. But often, you will want to include existing data as a part of the new object you’re creating. For example, you may want to update only one co-ordinate(say x) and keep rest co-ordinates as it is.

We can use the `... object spread` syntax so that you don’t need to copy every property separately.

```js
setPosition({ ...position, x: 10 });
```

If your state is deeply nested, you might want to consider flattening it. But, if you don’t want to change your state structure, you might prefer a shortcut to nested spreads. <span style="color: OrangeRed;">Immer</span> is a popular library that lets you write using the convenient but mutating syntax and takes care of producing the copies for you. With `Immer`, the code you write looks like you are “breaking the rules” and mutating an object:

```js
import { produce } from "immer";

const state = {
  user: {
    name: "Alice",
    age: 25,
  },
};

const updatedState = produce(state, (draft) => {
  draft.user.age = 26; // Mutating draft safely
});
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Updating Arrays in State</h3>

<b>Arrays are mutable in JavaScript, but you should treat them as immutable when you store them in state. Just like with objects, when you want to update an array stored in state, you need to create a new one (or make a copy of an existing one), and then set state to use the new array.</b>

In JavaScript, arrays are just another kind of object. Like with objects, you should treat arrays in React state as read-only. This means that you shouldn’t reassign items inside an array like arr[0] = 'bird', and you also shouldn’t use methods that mutate the array, such as push() and pop().

Instead, every time you want to update an array, you’ll want to pass a new array to your state setting function. To do that, you can create a new array from the original array in your state by calling its non-mutating methods like `filter()` and `map()`.

Similarly to case of objects, we can also use `... object spread` operator here also.

```js
...
const [arr, setArr] = useState([1,2,3]);
...
...
setArr([...arr, 4]);
```


</div>
