<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# State as a Snapshot

<b>State variables might look like regular JavaScript variables that you can read and write to. However, state behaves more like a snapshot. Setting it does not change the state variable you already have, but instead triggers a re-render.</b>

You might think of your user interface as changing directly in response to the user event like a click. In React, it works a little differently from this mental model. As told earlier, setting state requests a re-render from React. This means that for an interface to react to the event, you need to update the state.

Here’s what happens when you click the button in simple index updater code:

1. The `onClick` event handler executes.
2. `setIndex(index + 1)` sets index to `1` and queues a new render.
3. React re-renders the component according to the new `index` value.

## Rendering takes a snapshot in time

“Rendering” means that React is calling your component, which is a function. The JSX you return from that function is like a snapshot of the UI in time. Its props, event handlers, and local variables were all calculated using its state at the time of the render.

Unlike a photograph or a movie frame, the UI “snapshot” you return is interactive. It includes logic like event handlers that specify what happens in response to inputs. React updates the screen to match this snapshot and connects the event handlers. As a result, pressing a button will trigger the click handler from your JSX.

When React re-renders a component:

1. React calls your function again.
2. Your function returns a new JSX snapshot.
3. React then updates the screen to match the snapshot you’ve returned.

As a component’s memory, state is not like a regular variable that disappears after your function returns. State actually “lives” in React itself—as if on a shelf!—outside of your function. When React calls your component, it gives you a snapshot of the state for that particular render. Your component returns a snapshot of the UI with a fresh set of props and event handlers in its JSX, all calculated using the state values from that render!

Here’s a little experiment to show you how this works. In this example, you might expect that clicking the `+3` button would increment the counter three times because it calls `setNumber(number + 1)` three times.

See what happens when you click the `+3` button:

```js
export default function Counter() {
  const [number, setNumber] = useState(0);

  return (
    <>
      <h1>{number}</h1>
      <button
        onClick={() => {
          setNumber(number + 1);
          setNumber(number + 1);
          setNumber(number + 1);
        }}
      >
        +3
      </button>
    </>
  );
}
```

Notice that number only increments once per click!

<span style="color: Chartreuse;">Setting state only changes it for the next render.</span> During the first render, number was `0`. This is why, in that render’s onClick handler, the value of number is still `0` even after `setNumber(number + 1)` was called.

Even though you called `setNumber(number + 1)` three times, in this render’s event handler number is always `0`, so you set the state to `1` three times. This is why, after your event handler finishes, React re-renders the component with number equal to `1` rather than `3`.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">State over time</h3>

Value `0` only is alerted in below code! <span style="color: Coral;">A state variable’s value never changes within a render, even if its event handler’s code is asynchronous.</span> Inside that render’s onClick, the value of number continues to be `0` even after `setNumber(number + 5)` was called. Its value was “fixed” when React “took the snapshot” of the UI by calling your component.

```jsx
<button
  onClick={() => {
    setNumber(number + 5);
    setTimeout(() => {
      alert(number);
    }, 3000);
  }}
>
  +5
</button>
```

<br>

# Queueing a Series of State Updates

<b>Setting a state variable will queue another render. But sometimes you might want to perform multiple operations on the value before queueing the next render. To do this, it helps to understand how React batches state updates.</b>

As you see in the above `Counter` component's code, each render’s state values are fixed, so the value of number inside the first render’s event handler is always `0`, no matter how many times you call `setNumber(1)`. But there is one other factor at play here. <b style="color: SpringGreen;">React waits until all code in the event handlers has run before processing your state updates.</b> This is why the re-render only happens after all these `setNumber()` calls.

This lets you update multiple state variables, even from multiple components without triggering too many re-renders. But this also means that the UI won’t be updated until after your event handler, and any code in it, completes. This behavior, also known as <b style="color:yellow;">batching</b>, makes your React app run much faster. It also avoids dealing with confusing “half-finished” renders where only some of the variables have been updated. <span style="color: Cyan;">Updates in different states are also batched (check below code). </span> State updates of both `num1` and `num2` are batched and re-rendering happes only 1 time. Console statement can be used to confirm this.

```jsx
import { useState } from 'react';

export default function App() {
  const [num1, setNum1] = useState(0);
  const [num2, setNum2] = useState(0);

  const handleClick = () => {
    setNum1(1);
    setNum2(1);
  };

  console.log('Rendering');

  return (
    <div className="App">
      <button onClick={handleClick}>
        Num1 = {num1} & Num2 = {num2}
      </button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

React does not batch across multiple intentional events like clicks—each click is handled separately. Rest assured that React only does batching when it’s generally safe to do. This ensures that, for example, if the first button click disables a form, the second click would not submit it again.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Updating the same state multiple times before the next render</h3>

It is an uncommon use case, but if you would like to update the same state variable multiple times before the next render, instead of passing the next state value like `setNumber(number + 1)`, you can pass a function that calculates the next state based on the previous one in the queue, like `setNumber(n => n + 1)`. It is a way to tell React to “do something with the state value” instead of just replacing it. Here, `n => n + 1` is called an <span style="color: Cyan;">updater function</span>. When you pass it to a state setter:

1. React queues this function to be processed after all the other code in the event handler has run.
2. During the next render, React goes through the queue and gives you the final updated state.

The functional form of the state updater in React is a method of updating state where the updater function receives the previous state value as an argument. This is particularly useful when the new state depends on the current state, especially in cases where multiple state updates might occur in quick succession or in asynchronous situations.

<b><u>KEY CONCEPTS</u></b>

<b style="color:PaleGreen;">1. React State Updates are Asynchronous:</b> When calling the state updater function, the update is scheduled and does not immediately affect the current state within the same render.</br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">2. Access to the Latest State:</b> If you rely on the current state to compute the new state, using the functional updater ensures you always work with the most recent state, even when multiple updates occur.</br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">3. PrevState Argument:</b> The functional updater receives the previous state as an argument, which is guaranteed to be the most up-to-date value.

In given below code, `num` is updated to `3`.

```js
import { useState } from 'react';

export default function App() {
  const [num, setNum] = useState(0);

  const handleClick = () => {
    setNum(num + 1);
    setNum((prevNum) => prevNum + 1);
    setNum((prevNum) => prevNum + 1);
  };

  return (
    <div className="App">
      <button onClick={handleClick}>Num = {num}</button>
    </div>
  );
}
```

<span style="color: Crimson;">Due to this reason only, remember - don't store callback functions in states directly.</span> The returned value from those functions will get stored instead of actual callback! if you want to store a callback function, pass a function which returns that callback function.

<span style="color: OrangeRed;">The updater function must not mutate the received previous state and return it.</span> This is because new reference must be returned in order to trigger re-render.

```jsx
setState((prevState) => {
  prevState.key = 'newValue';
  return prevState;
}); ❌

setState((prevState) => {
  const copyState = { ...prevState };
  copyState.key = 'newValue';
  return copyState;
}); ✅
```

</div>
