<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Principles of structuring state

When you write a component that holds some state, you’ll have to make choices about how many state variables to use and what the shape of their data should be. While it’s possible to write correct programs even with a suboptimal state structure, there are a few principles that can guide you to make better choices:

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">1. Group Related State</h3>

If you always update two or more state variables at the same time, consider merging them into a single state variable.

```js
// Approach - 1

const [x, setX] = useState(0);
const [y, setY] = useState(0);

// Approach - 2

const [position, setPosition] = useState({ x: 0, y: 0 });
```

Technically, you can use either of these approaches. But if some two state variables always change together, it might be a good idea to unify them into a single state variable. Then you won’t forget to always keep them in sync.

Another case where you’ll group data into an object or an array is when you don’t know how many pieces of state you’ll need. For example, it’s helpful when you have a form where the user can add custom fields.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">2. Avoid redundant state</h3>

If you can calculate some information from the component’s props or its existing state variables during rendering, you should not put that information into that component’s state.

```jsx
const [firstName, setFirstName] = useState('');
const [lastName, setLastName] = useState('');
const [fullName, setFullName] = useState('');

function handleFirstNameChange(e) {
  setFirstName(e.target.value);
  setFullName(e.target.value + ' ' + lastName);
}

function handleLastNameChange(e) {
  setLastName(e.target.value);
  setFullName(firstName + ' ' + e.target.value);
}
```

This form has three state variables: `firstName`, `lastName`, and `fullName`. However, `fullName` is redundant. You can always calculate `fullName` from `firstName` and `lastName` during render, so remove it from state. As a result, the change handlers don’t need to do anything special to update it. When you call `setFirstName` or `setLastName`, you trigger a re-render, and then the next fullName will be calculated from the fresh data. Just replace the code of state declaration of `fullName` above with below code:

```js
const fullName = firstName + ' ' + lastName;
```

<b style="color:HotPink;">Don’t mirror props in state!</b> A common example of redundant state is code like this:

```js
function Message({ messageColor }) {
  const [color, setColor] = useState(messageColor);
}
```

Here, a `color` state variable is initialized to the `messageColor` prop. The problem is that if the parent component passes a different value of `messageColor` later (for example, `'red'` instead of `'blue'`), the `color` state variable would not be updated! The state is only initialized during the first render. This is why “mirroring” some prop in a state variable can lead to confusion. Instead, use the `messageColor` prop directly in your code.

”Mirroring” props into state only makes sense when you want to ignore all updates for a specific prop. By convention, start the prop name with `initial` or `default` to clarify that its new values are ignored:

```jsx
function Message({ initialColor }) {
  // The `color` state variable holds the *first* value of `initialColor`.
  // Further changes to the `initialColor` prop are ignored.
  const [color, setColor] = useState(initialColor);
}
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">3. Avoid duplication in state</h3>

This menu list component lets you choose a single travel snack out of several:

```jsx
const initialItems = [
  { title: 'pretzels', id: 0 },
  { title: 'crispy seaweed', id: 1 },
  { title: 'granola bar', id: 2 },
];

export default function Menu() {
  const [items, setItems] = useState(initialItems);
  const [selectedItem, setSelectedItem] = useState(items[0]);
}
```

Currently, it stores the selected item as an object in the selectedItem state variable. However, this is not great: the contents of the selectedItem is the same object as one of the items inside the items list. This means that the information about the item itself is duplicated in two places. This is problamatic because we have to update state 2 times if selected item is being updated.

Although you could update `selectedItem` too, an easier fix is to remove duplication. In this example, instead of a `selectedItem` object (which creates a duplication with objects inside items), you hold the `selectedId` in state, and then get the `selectedItem` by searching the items array for an item with that ID:

```jsx
const [items, setItems] = useState(initialItems);
const [selectedId, setSelectedId] = useState(0);
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">4. Avoid deeply nested state</h3>

Imagine a travel plan consisting of planets, continents, and countries. You might be tempted to structure its state using nested objects and arrays, like in this example:

```jsx
export const initialTravelPlan = {
  id: 0,
  title: '(Root)',
  childPlaces: [
    {
      id: 1,
      title: 'Earth',
      childPlaces: [
        {
          id: 2,
          title: 'Africa',
          childPlaces: [
            {
              id: 3,
              title: 'Botswana',
              childPlaces: [],
            },
          ],
        },
      ],
    },
  ],
};
```

Now let’s say you want to add a button to delete a place you’ve already visited. How would you go about it? Updating nested state involves making copies of objects all the way up from the part that changed. Deleting a deeply nested place would involve copying its entire parent place chain. Such code can be very verbose.

<span style="color: Lime;">If the state is too nested to update easily, consider making it “flat”.</span> Here is one way you can restructure this data. Instead of a tree-like structure where each place has an array of its child places, you can have each place hold an array of its child place IDs. Then store a mapping from each place ID to the corresponding place.

```jsx
export const initialTravelPlan = {
  0: {
    id: 0,
    title: '(Root)',
    childIds: [1, 42, 46],
  },
  1: {
    id: 1,
    title: 'Earth',
    childIds: [2, 10, 19, 26, 34],
  },
  2: {
    id: 2,
    title: 'Africa',
    childIds: [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9],
  },
  3: {
    id: 3,
    title: 'Botswana',
    childIds: [],
  },
};
```

In order to remove a place now, you only need to update two levels of state:

1. The updated version of its parent place should exclude the removed ID from its `childIds` array.
2. The updated version of the root “table” object should include the updated version of the parent place.

<br>

# Sharing State Between Components

Sometimes, you want the state of two components to always change together. To do it, remove state from both of them, move it to their closest common parent, and then pass it down to them via props. This is known as <span style="color: Yellow;">lifting state up</span>, and it’s one of the most common things you will do writing React code.



</div>
