<div style="font-size: 17px;background: black;padding: 2rem;">

# Module Federation

Module Federation is a groundbreaking feature introduced in Webpack 5 that allows multiple Webpack builds to share code and dependencies dynamically at runtime. It facilitates the seamless integration of independently developed and deployed modules, enabling features like micro-frontends, dynamic module loading, and shared libraries.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Key Concepts</h3>

<b style="color:Khaki;">1. Federated Modules:</b> Federated Modules are Webpack builds configured to expose or consume modules from other builds. Each application or module can be treated as an independent entity with its own dependencies and Webpack configuration. These builds are also referred as <span style="color: Cyan;">containers</span>.<br>
<b style="color:Khaki;">2. Host and Remote:</b>

- <span style="color: Lime;">Host:</span> The application that consumes modules from other applications at runtime.
- <span style="color: Lime;">Remote:</span> The application exposing its modules to be consumed by other applications.
- <span style="color: Lime;">Bidirectional-Host:</span> The bidirectional host is an artifact that can be both a host or a remote, consuming other applications or being consumed by others.

Also, the modules that are part of the current build are called <span style="color: Cyan;">local modules</span> and modules that are not part of the current build but are loaded at runtime from a remote container are called <span style="color: Cyan;">remote modules</span>.
<br>

<b style="color:Khaki;">3. Shared Dependencies:</b> Module Federation allows applications to share common dependencies like React or Lodash. This reduces redundancy and improves performance by avoiding duplicate code in the final bundle.<br>
<b style="color:Khaki;">4. Runtime Integration:</b> Module Federation loads and integrates modules during <u style="color: Crimson;">runtime</u>, enabling true decoupling of microservices or micro-frontends. Hence, remote modules are not available immediately during application runtime. They are fetched asynchronously from the remote container. Therefore, to use a remote module, there must be a <span style="color: HotPink;">chunk loading operation</span> <u>(a mechanism to dynamically load JavaScript chunks during runtime like `import()` for simple JS data or `React.lazy()` to fetch react components)</u> to handle the asynchronous nature of fetching the remote code.

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Principles of Module Federation</h3>

<b style="color:PaleGreen;">1. Universal Module Support:</b> It should be possible to expose and consume any module type that webpack supports (e.g., JavaScript ES Modules, CommonJS, AMD, JSON, or WASM). This ensures compatibility with existing codebases and modern module systems, making it flexible for different application architectures.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">2. Efficient Chunk Loading:</b> When a remote module is consumed, all its required dependencies (chunks) are fetched in parallel. For example, if a remote module `B` requires several other files (`B.js`, `B1.js`, `B2.js`), Webpack ensures they are loaded in a single request or parallel requests to reduce latency.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">3. Consumer-Controlled Integration:</b> The consumer (the application importing a remote module) has full control over what to import from the container (remote app) and how the imported module is used in its build. This ensures the host app dictates how dependencies are managed and avoids unintentional behavior from the remote container.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">4. One-Directional Overriding:</b> Overriding happens when the consumer provides its own version of a shared module (e.g., React). The container cannot override the consumer’s modules. This prevents sibling containers or remotes from accidentally interfering with each other. And obviously, sibling containers cannot override each other's modules.<br>
<b style="color:PaleGreen;">5. Shared Module Requests:</b> Shared modules are typically libraries (e.g., React, Lodash) that multiple applications or micro-frontends need. Webpack optimizes these shared modules to avoid redundancy, reduce bundle size, and ensure compatibility across applications.

1. <span style="color:DeepSkyBlue;">Relative and Absolute Requests:</span> These requests will always be provided, even if not used by host app. Will resolve relative to <span style="color: Violet;">config.context</span>. Does not use a <span style="color: Gold;">requiredVersion</span> by default.
2. <span style="color:DeepSkyBlue;">Module Requests:</span>
   - Modules like `react` are shared only if they are actually used in host app.
   - If multiple parts of the app use `react`, Webpack ensures they all use the same instance.
   - <span style="color: Violet;">Module requests with trailing `/` in shared will match all module requests with this prefix.</span> This is particularly useful for scoped packages or libraries with many submodules like `lodash`.
   ```js
    {
      shared: {
        "lodash/": {
          singleton: true, // Share all modules under this scope as a single instance
        },
      },
    }
   ```

<br>

To use Module Federation, we need to configure the <span style="color: Coral;">ModuleFederationPlugin</span> in Webpack configuration file. No need to install it separately, Webpack comes equipped with it. Here’s an example of using module federation:

```js
// App1/src/index.js

const appName = 'Application-1';
export default appName;
```

```js
// App1/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  //......
  plugins: [
    //......
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'App1',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      exposes: {
        './app1Index': './src',
      },
    }),
  ],
};
```

```js
// Container/src/index.js

import('App1/app1Index')
  .then((module) => {
    console.log(module.default);
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.log({ error });
  });
```

```js
// Container/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  // .....
  plugins: [
    // ....
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'App2',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      remotes: {
        App1: 'App1@http://localhost:3001/remoteEntry.js',
      },
    }),
  ],
};
```

<h3 style="border-bottom: 2px solid white; padding-bottom: 2px; display: inline-block;">Remote Application Configuration Options</h3>

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">name</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(string)</span>: A unique identifier for the container. This name is used to reference the container in other applications when consuming its modules.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">filename</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(string)</span>: Specifies the file name for the output bundle that acts as an entry point for the federated modules. This file contains all the metadata for exposed modules. Example: `"remoteEntry.js"`. It's a convention also to name it like this and it is default value also.
- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">exposes</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(object)</span>: Defines which modules from this container can be used by other containers. It is an object where keys are the names under which modules are exposed, and values are paths to the modules.

  ```js
  module.exports = {
    plugins: [
      new ModuleFederation({
        name: 'provider',
        exposes: {
          // Note: "./" is not supported. Exporting as `.` indicates a default export
          '.': './src/index.tsx',
          './add': './src/utils/add.ts',
          './Button': './src/components/Button.tsx',
        },
      }),
    ],
  };
  ```

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">remotes</b><span style="color: Magenta;">(object)</span>: Lists the remote containers from which this container can consume modules. Each key is a local alias for the remote module, and the value is the path or function returning the path to the remote container's entry file. The `remotes` object is a mapping where:

  - **Key:** The name you'll use to reference the remote container in your code.
  - **Value:** A string that specifies the remote container's unique name and entry file location - `"remoteName@remoteUrl/remoteEntry.js"`. Parts of the value:
    - `remoteName`: The name of the remote container, as defined in its `ModuleFederationPlugin` `name` option.
    - `remoteUrl/remoteEntry.js`: The URL where the remote container's entry point (`remoteEntry.js`) is hosted.

  ```js
  new ModuleFederationPlugin({
    remotes: {
      remoteApp: 'remoteApp@http://localhost:3001/remoteEntry.js',
    },
  });
  ```

- <b style="color:SpringGreen;">shared 😖😵‍💫 </b><span style="color: Magenta;">(array | object)</span>: It configures how dependencies are shared between the host and remote containers in a Module Federation setup. Purpose:

  1. **Reduce Duplication:** Avoid multiple copies of the same library being loaded by different containers.
  2. **Ensure Compatibility:** Enforce version compatibility across containers.
  3. **Optimize Performance:** Minimize download size by using already-loaded dependencies when possible.

  - <span style="color: Violet;">Array syntax</span>: Simplest form where you list dependencies to share without additional configuration.

    ```js
    shared: ['react', 'react-dom'];
    ```

  - <span style="color: Violet;">Object syntax</span>: This syntax provides more control over each shared library in which one can define package name as the key and version (semver) as the value.vThis syntax allows to provide additional hints to each shared package where we define the package name as the key, and the value as an object containing hints to modify sharing behavior.

    ```js
    shared: {
      react: { singleton: true, eager: true, requiredVersion: "^17.0.1" },
      "react-dom": { singleton: true, eager: true, requiredVersion: "^17.0.1" }
    }
    ```

    <u>Configurations:</u>

    - <span style="color: Salmon;">singleton</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(boolean [Default: true])</span>
      - If set to `true`, singleton mode is enabled; if set to `false`, singleton mode is not enabled.
      - If singleton mode is enabled, the shared dependencies between the remote application components and the host application will only be loaded once, and a higher version will be loaded if the versions are inconsistent. A warning will be given for the party with the lower version.
      - If singleton mode is not enabled, and the shared dependencies between the remote application and the host application have different versions, each will load their own dependencies.
    - <span style="color: Salmon;">eager</span>: <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(boolean [Default: false])</span> Whether to immediately load the shared module. <span style="color: Lime;">Under normal circumstances, you need to enable lazy entry, and then asynchronously load shared modules on demand.</span> If you want to use shared but do not want to enable lazy entry, you can set it to `true`.<br> <b style="color: rgb(251, 180, 81);">WARNING:</b> Setting `eager` to `true` will package the shared dependencies into the entry file, which may result in a large entry file size. Use with caution.
    - <span style="color: Salmon;">requiredVersion</span> 😵‍💫😵‍💫😵‍💫 : <span style="color: DarkSalmon;">(string)</span> CHECK THIS LINK - <a href="https://module-federation.io/configure/shared.html#requiredversion">requiredVersion</a>

<br>

**<u>EXAMPLE CODE (with shared config)**</u>

```js
// App1/src/index.js

import('./bootstrap.js');
```

```js
// App1/src/bootstrap.js

import _ from 'lodash';

const obj = {
  key: 'value',
};

console.log('App1: ', _.get(obj, 'key'));

export default obj;
```

```js
// App1/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  //....
  plugins: [
    //....
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'App1',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      exposes: {
        './app1Index': './src/bootstrap',
      },
      shared: ['lodash'],
    }),
  ],
};
```

```js
// Container/src/index.js

import('./bootstrap.js');
```

```js
// Container/src/bootstrap.js

import _ from 'lodash';

import('App1/app1Index')
  .then((module) => {
    console.log('Container: ', _.get(module, 'default.key'));
  })
  .catch((error) => {
    console.log({ error });
  });
```

```js
// Container/webpack.config.js

const ModuleFederationPlugin = require('webpack/lib/container/ModuleFederationPlugin');

module.exports = {
  //....
  plugins: [
    //....
    new ModuleFederationPlugin({
      name: 'Container',
      filename: 'remoteEntry.js',
      remotes: {
        App1: 'App1@http://localhost:3001/remoteEntry.js',
      },
      shared: ['lodash'],
    }),
  ],
};
```

</div>
